Review of Borobudur Temple
| Taman Wisata Candi Borobudur, Borobudur, Magelang 56553, Indonesia
+62 274 496 402
Private Tour of Borobudur, Pawon and Mendut Temple
See more tours on Viator
Attraction details
Fee: Yes
Owner description: Constructed from massive blocks of volcanic stone, over a thousand reliefs are carved into this landmark pyramid-shaped monument.
Sponsored links *
“Wow!
An impressive temple”
Reviewed 6 days ago NEW
This amazing temple is one of must-see tourist attractions in Java.
It takes around 1 hour transfer from Yogjakarta city.
This huge monument is located in a green valley and consists of nine stacked platforms, six square and three circular, topped by a central dome.
Amazing decoration with more than 2000 relief panels and hundreds of Buddha statues.
Although many reliefs and statues have been destroyed because of earth quakes and time, the site remains its endless charm.
Visited April 2015
Ask Nga H about Borobudur Temple
This review is the subjective opinion of a TripAdvisor member and not of TripAdvisor LLC.
3,381 reviews from our community
See what travelers are saying:
Traveler rating
“Great”
Reviewed 6 days ago NEW
amazing architecture and spiritual place, I came here not in high season but still difficult to take perfect picture.
The only I hate from this area was the exit.
I have to walk maybe around 2km with annoying seller along the way.
Visited March 2016
Ask AnnePaays about Borobudur Temple
This review is the subjective opinion of a TripAdvisor member and not of TripAdvisor LLC.
Tricia W
“Grandeur of era gone”
Reviewed 6 days ago NEW via mobile
Nature and history has eroded the past glory.
But what remains bear testament of what human faith and belief can achieve.
Visited March 2016
Ask Tricia W about Borobudur Temple
This review is the subjective opinion of a TripAdvisor member and not of TripAdvisor LLC.
Alex C
“What's The Big Deal”
Reviewed 6 days ago NEW
OK, you don't see anything like this temple where I come from, but then again I wasn't missing a whole lot.
The most telling observation I made was how much of the temple is missing rather than what's there.
There are pieces of the temple missing all over the place, no doubt having been stolen for private ownership, and now resting in some sleazeball's home or at a museum.
Borobudor Temple is all right, but after walking around the circumferences of every level from the top down to the bottom, and not really seeing anything new and exciting along the way, then finishing up after a pretty short time, I wondered "So???"
My wife and I had just taken a couple of buses, walked a fair distance, being hounded much of the way by drivers who told us the temple was too far to walk when we knew it wasn't....then charged a special price for foreigners, and then..."So???"
It was much of a day spent getting there and back, and I wonder why I bothered.
Because I believed the hype YET AGAIN.
The grounds are nice, and the scenery is pretty good around the temple, and maybe you have to see it once, but I wasn't thrilled, and frankly I'm surprised that so many reviewers on here were.
Visited June 2015