“Candi Borobudur,the largest Buddhist monument in the world”
Reviewed August 4, 2015
Our taxi picked us up at 3.30 AM & we were going to Borobudur, the largest Buddhist monument in the world.
This was such an odd time to visit some place on a holiday, but we were told that one must reach there for a stunning sunrise.
This temple is often considered as one of the world’s wonders & sits on a hill top in the island of Java.
We were to reach Manohara resort, about 45 kilometres from our hotel in Jogjakarta.
Entry fees were around 350,000 Indonesian rupees per head.
We were given a torch & were asked to follow the guide.
It was pitch dark & had absolutely no idea about what was in store for us.
We kept on walking & climbing never ending big stairs.
With 7 kg camera equipment on my back, it was tough but cool early morning weather & expectations of getting some phenomenal shots kept me going.
Reached the desired level after some very tough climbing & heaved a sigh of relief that I could manage it.
As the ambrosial hour passed things started becoming visible.
Whole structure was massive & an architectural marvel.
Its sheer size evoked a sense of grandeur.
It is an extraordinary structure with an equally amazing history.
Temple covers an enormous area, overlooking the lush green rice plantation fields & was built without using any cement, mortar or glue.
It is a massive interlocking stone blocks structure.
This 9th century Mahayana Buddhist temple consists of nine stacked platforms (six square & three circular) topped by a central dome & is decorated with 2700 bas-relief panels & 504 Buddha statues.
Little is known about the architect Gundharma, who designed it in the rein of Sailendra dynasty.
Pilgrimage begins at the base of the structure & ascends to the top through three levels of Buddhist spirituality Kamadhatu (world of desire), Rupadhatu (world of forms) & Arupadhatu (Niraakaar or formlessness).
Each stage is represented by a higher stage of enlightenment.
Central dome is surrounded by 72 Buddha statues inside the perforated stupas.
It is designed in Buddhist architecture with major influences of Indian Gupta art and indigenous Indonesian traditional art.
Borobudur is simplified Javanese pronunciation of Vihara Buddha uhr a Sanskrit word meaning “the city of Buddhas”.
Borobudur was constructed around the same period as the Shiva Prambanan temple, which is depicted by significant Hindu structures in the temple.
It is a legacy of culture, coexisting powers & shared harmony.
Buddha images, Dwarpals (Guards), lions etc all indicate the mixed Hindu & Buddhist influence.
Bas-reliefs depict daily life in Java, hermits, life of Buddha, kings, queens, Apsaraas Gods, Asuras, figures of Surasundari holding a lotus, flora & fauna.
Birth & life of Siddhartha is also depicted along with the mother Maya & father Suddhodana.
In 14th century temple was abandoned with the decline of Hindu Kingdoms & Javanese conversion to Islam.
It lay hidden for centuries under thick forest & volcanic ash.
It was discovered by British ruler of Java in 1814 by Sir Thomas Stamford.
Later the temple was also looted by the local officers & rulers, taking away artefacts, Buddha statues & bas-reliefs as trophies.
Many artefacts can now be seen in Java museum & even in the National museum of Bangkok.
Monuments also suffered damages due to soft soil around it, earthquakes & volcanic eruptions.
In 1991 UNESCO declared it as world heritage site.
In 1985 it was damaged by bomb attacks of Islamic terrorists.
2006 earthquake & 2010 Mount Merapi (27 kilometres from the temple) volcanic eruptions also had its sadistic effect on this beautiful structure.
Temple is now well guarded because of threat by ISIS.
At first all the Buddha statues look same but there are small differences in Asanas & Mudras.
Many statues are headless with the heads decorating museums & private houses.
As the sun rises all structures become more clear & more fascinating.
Place can be very hot in the day time so it is best to visit early morning.
Temple is also used as a place for pilgrimage & Buddhist in Indonesia come here every year celebrating “Vesak”.
It is one of the few sites where you feel lucky that you have visited, seen & photographed it.
Just like Angkor Vat & Prambanan you start feeling something special & blessed.
One starts to begin to feel the extent of which we humans are capable of doing with little or no knowledge.
Sunrise is stunning & most amazing.
Most of the visitors were western tourist soaking in the spirituality of the place.
I had a good time clicking few decent pictures.
Reviewed August 3, 2015 via mobile
I've been to this temple a total of 3 times before I went for the 4th time with my partner and sister.
Borobudur is still as magnificent as ever.
Have always thought how amazing this construction was when I was younger and I am happy to say this temple is actually being taken care of better than I expected.
Somehow this place looked cleaner than before.
The tourists are also a little mor respectful, as I saw no one climbing the stupas or smoking around the temple.
Only downside was the long long LONG walk out at the end where we were required to walk through HEAPS of tourist trap stalls.... Didn't think that was necessary and I got a headache from walking such long walk in a stuffy walkway and also in the heat.
Visited July 2015
Reviewed August 2, 2015 via mobile
Temple was interesting BUT a lot was under construction and not worth the entrance price.
Sad because you know you're getting ripped off as there is a foreigner entrance and a local entrance *sigh*.
What really did my head in though was when I was ready to go I really could not leave.
I followed all the exits and I was lead through a maze of vendors selling the same crap.
When I thought the horror of those vendors was over I was wrong cause then I had to walk through ANOTHER hot maze and yet ANOTHER one also.
I honestly think that the people selling have put these exit signs up so you go past every single seller!
I felt trapped, all I wanted to do was leave and souvenirs and souvenirs and sellers for what was im sure at least a KILOMETRE!
I think I actually spent more time trying to leave than the initial time at the temple.
Oh and a tip, if you have been driven there make sure you know SPECIFICALLY which part of the carpark your driver will be waiting in.
The carpark is huge and even though it wasn't packed when I went, it was still a lot of walking up and down to find my driver especially after the souvenir maze.
Visited July 2015
“Best sunrise”
Reviewed August 2, 2015
Getting up early is a very difficult task... Specially given than you are on holidays... But it was all worth...
Getting there-
Book a rental car.
We started from our hotel at around 2-2:30AM.
We arrived quite early, we could have started with a delay of another 30minutes and still could have made it in time.
What to wear-
We were told that it would like of hike and its better to get shoes but we found out that's not needed at all.
You can very well go in slippers.
But the stairs are a little steep and high rise so better to wear something which will have good grip.
Wear comfortable clothing which won't become an issue while climbing upstairs.
What to bring-
Bring a hat if you want, once the sunrises, it can be really sunny n hot.
If you arrive there a little early then you might wanna bring a quilt or a portable blanket to cover you up while you wait for sunrise.
And don't forget to bring your camera.
The view-
The view of dawn (even before the sun shows up) is spellbinding.
You will see vast plantation of palm tree and foggy clouds above it... until the horizon.
The temple-
The temple is just awesome.
The symmetry is so hard to miss.
There is a Buddha status in middle and when sunrays fall over it, it just looks awesome.
There can be really nice clicks that you can take at that point of time.
Try to go as up as you can.
Its awesome.
You can observe the symmetry of all the bell structures from there.
The sunrise-
The sunrise view of sun coming up behind the mountains is just great!
It was the best sunrise.
I was lucky to be on a non-cloudy day so it was quite clear view.
I have been on Mount Batur trekk and would rate this one better than Mount Batur.
A must go place if you are visiting Jogjakarta.
There was a hotel nearby and if you like you can stay there to make things easier for you.