NOV
MAR
Apr
27
2015
2016
2017
12 captures
19 Jun 14 - 19 Apr 16
Close Help
Skip to main content
User menu
Login
Register
About
About us
Meet the Team
We Give Back
Member Rewards
Expeditions
Interactive Map
Site Map
Links
All Links
Ancient Places
Ancient Texts
Authors & Researchers
Human Origins
Myths & Legends
Scientific News
History & Archaeology
Space, UFO & Other Strange Phenomena - Links
Books
Book Reviews
Suggested Books
Events
Tours
Events
Gallery
Video
Forums
Contact
Search
Enter your keywords
Get our Free Ebook»
Get our Free APP »
Main menu
News
General
History & Archaeology
Science & Space
Evolution & Human Origins
Mysterious Phenomena
Human Origins
Science
Religions
Folklore
Myths
Ancient Places
Europe
Asia
Americas
Australia & Oceania
Africa
Antarctica
Artifacts
Other Artifacts
Ancient Technology
Ancient Writings
History
Ancient Traditions
Important Events
Famous People
Opinion
Author Profiles
Writers' List
Guest Articles
Editorials
Unexplained
News
General
History & Archaeology
Science & Space
Evolution & Human Origins
Mysterious Phenomena
Home / News
Suggested Books
Active forum topics
Evidence of Origin of Light Skin
technical problem
Ancient Civilisations Are Over 350,000 Years Old
Teotihuacan - Facts About a Mysterious Giant
Alignment of the Pyramids of Chichen Itza
What Causes Earth Crust Displacements?
More
Suggested Books
Popular content
Initial DNA analysis of Paracas elongated skull released – with incredible results
The story of Ragnarok and the Apocalypse
Extensive Ancient Underground Networks Discovered Throughout Europe
The human skull that challenges the Out of Africa theory
Ancient Humans Bred with Completely Unknown Species
Suggested Books
16 June, 2014 - 12:26 dhwty
The magnificent ancient Buddhist Temple of Borobudur
(Read the article on one page)
Indonesia is the country with the largest Muslim population in the world.
Prior to the coming of Islam, however, this archipelago was dominated by Hinduism and Buddhism.
One of the most iconic monuments attesting to this pre-Islamic era is the Borobudur Temple Compound in the Kedu Valley, which is situated on the southern part of Central Java.
The Borobudur Temple Compound consists of three monuments, namely the Temple of Borobudur and two smaller temples located on the east on a straight axis to the main temple.
The main temple of Borobudur itself is the largest Buddhist temple in the world.
This 60,000m³ monument is 34.5m high and has a square base of 123m x 123m.
Borobudur was built in three tiers.
The base of this temple consists of a pyramid formed by five concentric square terraces.
This is followed by the trunk of a cone with three platforms.
On the very top is a monumental stupa (a mound-like structure containing Buddhist relics).
The walls and balustrades of Borobudur are decorated with fine low reliefs depicting various Buddhist scenes.
Borobudur.
Source: BigStockPhoto
This temple was built as a Mahayana Buddhist temple around the8th and 9 th century A.D. by the Sailendra dynasty.
This dynasty originated either from South India or Indochina.
Their presence in Java helped establish the island as a centre of Buddhist scholarship and worship.
This is evident in the fact that Chinese coins and ceramics have been found at the site, indicating that it pilgrims from as far away as China once visited this sacred site.
In addition, these artefacts suggest that Borobudur was abandoned by the 16 th century A.D.
This may be due to the fact that the arrival of Islam on Java during the 13 th and 14 th centuries A.D. shifted the centre of Javan life to the eastern part of the island.
Nevertheless, Borobudur was left to decay on its own.
Over the next couple of centuries, volcanic eruptions deposited ash on the site, and Borobudur was engulfed by the lush vegetation that grew out of the fertile volcanic ash.
Although Borobudur was a largely forgotten site, it would not remain so forever.
In the early 19 th century, Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles, the British governor of Java (and the founder the city of Singapore), heard about Borobudur, and took an interest in it.
Hence, an excavation was organised to uncover the temple.
Whilst this excavation brought Borobudur back into the limelight, it was had damaging effects on it.
By exposing the temple to the elements, the temple began to deteriorate further.
Furthermore, stones were casually removed by villagers to be used as building materials, while Buddha heads and other treasures were removed by collectors to be sold to private and public collections around the world.
Borobudur.
Source: BigStockPhoto
In 1948, the plight of Borobudur came to the attention of the newly formed Republic of Indonesia.
As a result, the preservation of this cultural heritage became a central priority of the government.
Two decades later, the “Save Borobudur” campaign was launched through the Indonesian government and UNESCO.
This was one of the most ambitious international preservation projects ever attempted, as the monument’s lower terraces were completely dismantled so that each stone could be individually identified, catalogued, cleaned and treated for preservation.
In addition, the relief panels were also cleaned and treated to withstand the elements.
Furthermore, an extensive drainage system was put in place behind the walls and under the floors of the galleries to reduce erosion.
Eight years and $25 million later, the restoration of Borobudur was finally completed.
Nevertheless, conservation of this temple has to be continued over the years.
For instance, just several months ago, Borobudur was threatened by the eruption of Mount Kelud.
In order to protect the temple, some of the stupas were quickly covered in order to protect them from the volcanic ash.
The fact that this incredible Buddhist monument continues to be treasured and protected in a predominantly Muslim country, is testament to its significant value as a cultural and historical icon of Indonesia.
Featured image: The stupas of Borobudur .
Source: BigStockPhoto.
By Ḏḥwty
References
Guinness World Records, 2014.
Largest Buddhist Temple.
[Online]
Available at: http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/records-3000/largest-buddhist-temple/
Jakarta Globe, 2014.
Borobudur, Other Sites, Closed After Mount Kelud Eruption.
[Online]
Available at: http://www.thejakartaglobe.com/news/borobudur-other-sites-closed-after-mount-kelud-eruption/
Lonely Planet, 2014.
Introducing Borobudur.
[Online]
Available at: http://www.lonelyplanet.com/indonesia/java/borobudur
National Geographic Travel, 2014.
Borobudur Temple Compounds.
[Online]
Available at: http://travel.nationalgeographic.com/travel/world-heritage/borobudur-temple/
Sacred Destinations, 2014.
Borobuur, Indonesia.
[Online]
Available at: http://www.sacred-destinations.com/indonesia/borobudur
Treasures of the World, 2014.
... saving Borobudur.
[Online]
Available at: http://www.pbs.org/treasuresoftheworld/borobudur/blevel_1/b6_saving.html
Pages
1
2
next ›
last »
Add new comment
Section:
Ancient Places
Asia
Tags:
Borobudur
temple
java
indonesia
Buddhist
Buddhism
Muslim
ancient
Sailendra dynasty
Stupa
Comments
angieblackmon wrote on 16 June, 2014 - 15:57 Permalink
i can't imagine having to catalog individual stones...it would be like a giant puzzle!
i'm glad to hear that people have gone to great lengths to protect the site, so many sites have been turned upside down by people who just take, take, take...leaving nothing for future generations.
love, light and blessings
AB
reply
Register to become part of our active community, get updates, receive a monthly newsletter, and enjoy the benefits and rewards of our member point system OR just post your comment below as a Guest.
Your name *
E-mail *
The content of this field is kept private and will not be shown publicly.
Homepage
Notify me when new comments are posted
All comments
Replies to my comment
Subject
Comment *
More information about text formats
Plain text
No HTML tags allowed.
Web page addresses and e-mail addresses turn into links automatically.
Lines and paragraphs break automatically.
Home page
By submitting this form, you accept the Mollom privacy policy .
Related Articles on Ancient-Origins
5 July, 2014 - 02:53 ancient-origins
Ten Magnificent Ancient Structures of Asia
By Daniel Cameron , Epoch Times Featured below are just a few of the countless magnificent ancient structures that Asia has to offer.
1.
Tibet: Potala Palace Construction of the Potala Palace started...
Read more about Ten Magnificent Ancient Structures of Asia
3 comments
Add new comment
13 April, 2014 - 03:51 aprilholloway
Archaeologists unearth remnants of ancient Sailendra dynasty in Java
The Sailendra (or officially Sailendravamça) is the name of an influential Indonesian dynasty that emerged in 8th century Java.
The Sailendras were active promoters of Mahayana Buddhism and covered...
Read more about Archaeologists unearth remnants of ancient Sailendra dynasty in Java
1 comment
Add new comment
Most Read Today
The Ancient Pagan Origins of Easter
Was the Emperor Constantine a True Christian or Was He a Secret Pagan?
Treasures Found Within Very Valuable Viking Hoard Finally Revealed
Ten Legendary Swords from the Ancient World
Seven Wonders of the Ancient World: The Most Magnificent Monuments of Antiquity
The Almighty Hellburners of Antiquity
Unexpected and Gruesome Battle of 1250 BC Involved 4,000 Men from Across Northern Europe
Goddess Ninkharsag—Ancient Powerful Mother who Faded into The Holy Ghost
Goujian: The Ancient Chinese Sword that Defied Time
Most Popular
Legends
Technology
Ancient Places
The Ancient Pagan Origins of Easter
Easter Sunday is a festival and holiday celebrated by millions of people around the world who honour the resurrection of Jesus from the dead, described in the New Testament as having occurred three...
Goddess Ninkharsag—Ancient Powerful Mother who Faded into The Holy Ghost
Legendary Locks: Can Hair Act as a Sixth Sense, Protecting us from Danger?
The Royal Road of the King of the World, and the Ancient Center of the Earth
Ten Mythological Creatures in Ancient Folklore
The Celestial Snow White – Ancient Tale, Hidden Cypher- PART I
Ten amazing inventions from ancient times
Dating back thousands of years are numerous examples of ancient technology that leave us awe-struck at the knowledge and wisdom held by people of our past.
They were the result of incredible advances...
The Discovery that Revealed Ancient Humans Navigated the Seas 130,000 Years Ago
150,000-Year-Old Pipes Baffle Scientists in China: Out of Place in Time?
6 Advanced Ancient Inventions Beyond Modern Understanding
The Indian Sage who developed Atomic Theory 2,600 years ago
A Step Closer to the Mysterious Origin of the Viking Sword Ulfberht
Seven Wonders of the Ancient World: The Most Magnificent Monuments of Antiquity
The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World are seven awe-inspiring monuments of classical antiquity that reflect the skill and ingenuity of their creators.
The list, comprised by ancient Greek historians...
The Jagannath Temple in India: Home to a Trio of Deities and Numerous Religious Festivals
The Exceptional Underwater City of Cuba: A New Theory on its Origins – Part I
The Giants of Doddridge County: Burials of a Vanished Race – Part I
The Royal Road of the King of the World, and the Ancient Center of the Earth
Does Socos Pampa Geoglyph Reveal Nasca Lines Were Made Centuries Before Nasca Culture?
Recent comments
early european war
1 hour 11 min ago
Pithy perceptive comment
1 hour 22 min ago
I love old history and am
2 hours 18 min ago
verification
2 hours 20 min ago
Mary the Moon Godess
2 hours 32 min ago
Knights Templar suppression
3 hours 8 min ago
Ummm, no.
Etymology of the
3 hours 20 min ago
more
Suggested Books
Events
March
«
»
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
Top New Stories
The Unique Sculptures of Thutmose…and a Secret Love for One of His Muses?
When leaving his workshop in Amarna, the sculptor Thutmose may have wanted to forget something very painful.
A story which may have been carved in his heart perhaps?
He decided not to take some of...
The Jagannath Temple in India: Home to a Trio of Deities and Numerous Religious Festivals
Treasures Found Within Very Valuable Viking Hoard Finally Revealed
Was the Emperor Constantine a True Christian or Was He a Secret Pagan?
The Almighty Hellburners of Antiquity
Unfolding the Golden Nuggets of Early Chinese Paper Folding and the Art of Origami
Myths & Legends
The Ancient Pagan Origins of Easter
Easter Sunday is a festival and holiday celebrated by millions of people around the world who honour the resurrection of Jesus from the dead, described in the New Testament as having occurred three...
Goddess Ninkharsag—Ancient Powerful Mother who Faded into The Holy Ghost
Legendary Locks: Can Hair Act as a Sixth Sense, Protecting us from Danger?
The Royal Road of the King of the World, and the Ancient Center of the Earth
Ten Mythological Creatures in Ancient Folklore
The Celestial Snow White – Ancient Tale, Hidden Cypher- PART I
Human Origins
Legendary Locks: Can Hair Act as a Sixth Sense, Protecting us from Danger?
Humans have ever styled their hair in a multitude of creative and symbolic ways, and the various cuts, colors and presentations reflected across the ages are nearly unlimited.
But does hair serve us...
The human skull that challenges the Out of Africa theory
The origins of human beings according to ancient Sumerian texts
The Guilt of the Gnostic Knights Templar: The Chinon Parchment
King Solomon’s Mines Discovered: Ancient Treasures - Part II
King Solomon’s Mines Discovered: Kings and Pharaohs - Part I
Ancient Technology
Ten amazing inventions from ancient times
Dating back thousands of years are numerous examples of ancient technology that leave us awe-struck at the knowledge and wisdom held by people of our past.
They were the result of incredible advances...
The Discovery that Revealed Ancient Humans Navigated the Seas 130,000 Years Ago
150,000-Year-Old Pipes Baffle Scientists in China: Out of Place in Time?
6 Advanced Ancient Inventions Beyond Modern Understanding
A Step Closer to the Mysterious Origin of the Viking Sword Ulfberht
Unraveling the Mystery of the Ancient Olbia Gearwheel
Ancient Places
Seven Wonders of the Ancient World: The Most Magnificent Monuments of Antiquity
The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World are seven awe-inspiring monuments of classical antiquity that reflect the skill and ingenuity of their creators.
The list, comprised by ancient Greek historians...
The Jagannath Temple in India: Home to a Trio of Deities and Numerous Religious Festivals
Does Socos Pampa Geoglyph Reveal Nasca Lines Were Made Centuries Before Nasca Culture?
The Exceptional Underwater City of Cuba: A New Theory on its Origins – Part I
The Giants of Doddridge County: Burials of a Vanished Race – Part I
The Royal Road of the King of the World, and the Ancient Center of the Earth
Opinion
Does Socos Pampa Geoglyph Reveal Nasca Lines Were Made Centuries Before Nasca Culture?
Ancient Origins Guest Writer, William James Veall, completes his Opinion Piece trilogy by cementing together two earlier articles concerning " The Mysterious Holes of Peru " and " Seafarers from the...
What Became of Atlantis: The Flood from Heaven
King Solomon’s Mines Discovered: Ancient Treasures - Part II
King Solomon’s Mines Discovered: Kings and Pharaohs - Part I
Research Decodes Ancient Celtic Astronomy Symbols and Links them to Jungian Archetypes
The Celestial Snow White: Mary Magdalene, Moon Goddess – PART II
Our Mission
Ancient Origins seeks to uncover, what we believe, is one of the most important pieces of knowledge we can acquire as human beings – our beginnings.
While many believe that we already hold such knowledge, our view is that there still exists a multitude of anomalies and mysteries in humanity's past that deserve further examination.
We therefore wish to foster an open community that is dedicated to investigating, understanding and explaining the origins of our species on planet earth.
To this end, we aim to organize, support and even finance efforts in this direction.
Our aim is to move beyond theories and to present a thorough examination of current research and evidence and to offer alternative viewpoints and explanations to those currently held by mainstream science and archaeology.
Come with us on a journey to explore lost civilisations, sacred writings, ancient places, unexplained artefacts and scientific mysteries while we seek to reconstruct and retell the story of our beginnings.
Ancient Image Galleries
Ancient Origins © 2013 - 2015
Disclaimer  - Terms of Publication - Privacy Policy & Cookies - Advertising Policy - We Give Back - Contact us
A project of Stella Novus - Development and Customization by Novus Web Solutions
Next article