Feb
MAR
Apr
27
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
27 Mar 16 - 27 Mar 16
Close Help
Menu
Home
Things to do
Shopping
Sightseeing
Tours & Itineraries
Nature & Parks
Museums & Galleries
History & Culture
Theatres & Concerts
Attractions & Theme Parks
Outdoor Activities
Indoor Activities & Workshops
Health & Well-Being
Gaming & Entertainment
Festivals & Events
Places of Worship
Other Activities
Accommodation
Hotels
Hostels & Guest Houses
Bed & Breakfast
Vacation Rentals
Resorts & Villas
Apartments
Others
Food & Drink
Cafes
Restaurants
Local Specialties
Food Markets
Others
Popular Cities
Paris
Bali
London
Bangkok
Prague
New York
Singapore
Phuket (and vicinity)
Ubud
Honolulu
More Destinations
Trip101
Borobudur Temple: Visit The Largest Ancient Buddhist Temple In The World
Borobudur Temple: Visit The Largest Ancient Buddhist Temple In The World
Posted by Tejo
Indonesia > Magelang Architectural Gems Places of Worship History & Culture unesco site iconic landmark
Tejo
Posted 3 months ago
Indonesia is a country that is very rich in natural attractions and for that reason, there are many places you can visit during your stay in Indonesia. Besides its natural wonders such as Komodo dragons in Komodo islands and the volcanic crater of Mount Bromo, the archipelagic country also stores cultural heritage in the form of a sacred Buddhist temple, named Borobudur temple (or candi Borobudur in local term).
Search Hotels
Destination
Check-in date
Check-out date
I don't have specific dates yet
Search
share this page
A UNECSO world heritage site
Built in the 8th century, the Buddhist temple is the largest in the world, only after Angkor Wat in Cambodia. It has been listed by UNESCO as a world heritage site and has become one of the top places of worship for Buddhists around the world.
See our full list of recommended hotels near Borobudur Temple .
Incredible facts about Borobudur
This 123-meter long and 123-meter wide Buddhist temple contains nine stacked platforms with a dome at the top. The first five platforms from the bottom are square and the rest of the sections to the top are rounded. Like a pyramid, each platform gets narrower as you climb to the top. The building structure is very complex, as the platforms symbolize different periods of human life according to Buddhist teachings, manifested through the reliefs found on the walls.
The base floor is the Kamadhatu section that symbolizes people who are still bound to "worldly desires" that lead them to do ugly things. The next four floors are the Rupadhatu sections that describe those who are successfully free from all desires but are still physically alive and the rest of the floors above are called Arupadhatu, which features people who have been completely freed from both the worldly desires and the physical world. The top floor (Arupa section) is described as the highest level, a place where the Buddha resides. In total, there are 1544 mini stupas (Buddhist shrines) and 504 sculptures of Buddha (some are inside the stupas) of different sizes on all floors with one biggest stupa at the top.
See our full list of recommended hotels near Borobudur Temple .
Gorgeous sunrise from the temple's top
The best time for a visit is early in the morning, before the sun rises. Not only will you enjoy the fresh morning air, but together with these Buddha statues, you will have the precious chance to view the morning sun slowly appears from its hiding place behind the mountains of Merbabu and Merapi! The sunrise view is magnificent and provides great photo opportunities for avid photographers.
The temple is normally open to visitors at 6 am and the ticket price is 10 USD (half price for children under 6), but to enter the site before 6 am for the sunrise viewing, you need to pay additional 15 USD for the early entrance.
See our full list of recommended hotels near Borobudur Temple .
Hundreds of flying lanterns on Vesak night
On Vesak day (middle of the fourth month in the lunar calendar), the day that marks the birth of Buddha, there are some interesting rituals. The rituals are for the Buddhists, but non-Buddhists can see or even join the rituals. Normally the site is closed for visitors at 5 pm, but on Vesak day, it is open till around midnight. The procession inside the complex starts at 4pm and you will see and hear hundreds of Buddhists and Buddhist monks doing their worship rituals in Sanskrit language (a local language in India). At 7 pm, the worshiping session will end and devotees will circle Borobudur temple while holding a candle. You will find someone distributing candles to visitors and you can join them too. The whole ritual ends at 11 pm, and is marked by the release of more than 1,000 white lanterns into the air. (These lanterns are lighted with esbit fuel and hydrogenated to make them fly).
See our full list of recommended hotels near Borobudur Temple .
Watch a traditional dance performance within Borobudur.
Besides the temple visit, there are other activities you can do in Borobudur and one of them is watching a dance performance "Sendratari Mahakarya Borobudur" (Borobudur's Great Work of Art Dance) that describes how Borobudur's construction was done more than a millennia ago. Located at Aksobla theater inside the Borobudur complex, the performance involves more than 150 men and women. With the gorgeous background settings of Borobudur temple, exotic dancers in costumes and Javanese traditional music, you will be brought back to the 8th century, the time when thousands of men and women were doing what their king had ordered; to build a great temple to worship Buddha.
To see the performance, you need to contact the management, as it is only held two or three times a year. The ticket price ranges from 300,000 IDR (23 USD) to 600,000 IDR (46 USD), depending on how close you are to the stage.
See our full list of recommended hotels near Borobudur Temple .
Elephant ride during your tour
Besides the temple visit and dance performances, how about riding an elephant? You need not travel to Thailand or India for the ride, as you can have that at Borobudur too. With 39 USD, you can have a one-hour ride circling Borobudur temple. Although these elephants have been domesticated, you will need a pawang gajah (elephant handler) to follow you during your ride.
See our full list of recommended hotels near Borobudur Temple .
Airport pickup
Just 40 minutes from the international airport in Jogjakarta, Borobudur can easily be reached by land transportation. It is also close to other surrounding attractions (Prambanan temple, night market at downtown Jogjakarta and Parangtritis beach). Simply book a hotel in Borobudur area that can arrange an airport pickup for you and enjoy your tour!
Borobudur Temple Compounds
Best Hotels in Magelang
#1 Grand Artos Hotel & Convention
#2 Atria Hotel and Conference Magelang
#3 Hotel Puri Asri
See All Best Hotels in Magelang ›
Tejo
He is a traveler, writer, translator and teacher who has written articles on many different topics, specializing in travel,business and tech. He has spent many years in the United States,... Read more
Let's connect
     
Articles about Indonesia
Elo Rafting: Conquering The Harsh Current Of Elo River In Magelang
16 March 2016
Amata Borobudur Resort, Indonesia: Stay In A Traditional Javanese Bungalow
16 September 2015
Spectacles By Day And Night At Yogyakarta's South Square
28 September 2015
The Palaces Of Yogyakarta And Their Not-So-Distant History
28 September 2015
Bedding Down On The Cheap In Air-Conditioned Comfort In Yogyakarta
28 September 2015
River Trekking: Fun Water Play In Pulesari Tourism Village, Turi, Yogyakarta
05 November 2015
Yogyakarta’s Nature Charms: Adventures Await You At Yogyakarta
05 November 2015
Snorkeling At Nglambor Beach: A Beach That Is Guarded by Two Giant Turtles
05 November 2015
Experience Downtown Tranquility & Luxury In The Historic Royal Ambarrukmo Hotel
09 September 2015
Lip-Smacking Local Food To Try In Yogyakarta
10 September 2015
Nearby cities
Magelang, Indonesia (2)
Borobudur, Indonesia (1)
Yogyakarta (and vicinity), Indonesia (4)
Yogyakarta, Indonesia (10)
Semarang, Indonesia (3)
More Articles from this Author
What To Eat In Indonesia: 5 Tasty Food You Must Try!
09 September 2015
Hotel Majapahit In Surabaya, Indonesia: A Luxurious Hotel With A Heroic History
09 September 2015
Cassava Snacks: Unbelievably Yummy And Affordable Local Delicacies Of Indonesia
09 September 2015
Puhsarang Church In Kediri, Indonesia: A Blend Of European & Javanese Cultures
09 September 2015
Witness The Culture And Religious Harmony At Mount Kawi, Malang, Indonesia
09 September 2015
Good things are meant to be shared!
Accommodation
Hotels
Hostels & Guest Houses
Bed & Breakfast
Vacation Rentals
Resorts & Villas
Apartments
Things to do
Shopping
Sightseeing
Tours & Itineraries
Nature & Parks
Museums & Galleries
History & Culture
Get in Touch
About us
Partner with us
Write for us
Contact us
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Use of Cookies
Follow us
COPYRIGHT © 2016 TRIP101