Presidential Assassinations, Attempts, and Security Measures
Presidential Assassinations
Baltimore and Potomac Railroad Station, Southwest Corner of Constitution Avenue and 6th Street NW
Washington, DC
Garfield was shot from behind as he was walking through the station.  As a result of failed attempts to locate the bullet which caused infections and blood poisoning he died September 19, 1881 at Elberon, New Jersey.
Kennedy was struck by gunshots while riding in a motorcade through downtown Dallas.  He was pronounced dead at Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas shortly after the shooting.
Information and Resources about the Four Presidential Assassinations
Abraham Lincoln
U.S. Capitol
Washington, DC
A man attempted to fire two guns at Jackson at close range, however, the guns did not discharge a bullet and Jackson was unharmed.
333 West Kilbourne Avenue
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
After leaving the hotel and before heading to a campaign speech, a man fired on former President and current Presidential candidate Roosevelt and the bullet lodged in his chest. The bullet was slowed by the papers from Roosevelt's speech and his glasses case. He was not seriously injured and insisted on delivering his lengthly speech as planned.  Only after the speech did he go to the hospital for examination. It was decided that the bullet remain in Roosevelt's body.
301 Biscayne Boulevard
Miami, Florida
A man fired shots at the car from which President-Elect Roosevelt had just given a speech.  Roosevelt was not hit, but the bullets hit others, including Chicago Mayor Anton Cermak who died from his wounds.
1651 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC
Two gunmen unsuccessfully attempted to obtain entry to Blair House, where Truman was staying as the White House was being renovated. A gun battle with the Secret Service and other guards commenced and one gunman was killed and the other wounded. Truman was unharmed, but one White House police officer was killed.
1315 10th Street
Sacramento, California
A woman attempted to fire a gun at Ford as he was approaching the California Capitol. A Secret Service agent noticed and prevented her from firing the weapon.
335 Powell Street
San Francisco, California
Upon leaving the St. Francis Hotel a woman fired a gun at Ford. All the shots missed and Ford was unharmed.
1919 Connecticut Avenue NW
Washington, DC
Upon leaving the Washington Hilton Hotel, Reagan was shot by a gunman. He was rushed to George Washington University Hospital where he underwent surgery to remove the bullet. Reagan made a full recovery and returned to the White House on April 11, 1981.
This does not purport to be a complete list of every plot or attempt against the life of a U.S. President, but only those where an act was carried out and the President was in the immediate vicinity of the perpetrator.
Additional Information about Presidential Assassination Attempts and Security Measures