JAN
APR
OCT
1
2015
2016
2017
149 captures
15 Aug 02 - 18 Oct 16
Close Help
Tweet
Presidential Assassinations, Attempts, and Security Measures
Presidential Assassinations
President
Date
Location/Address
Outcome
Abraham Lincoln
April 14, 1865
Ford's Theatre, 511 10th Street NW
Washington, DC
Lincoln was shot as he was watching a play.
He died April 15, 1865 at the Petersen House in Washington of his wounds.
James Garfield
July 2, 1881
Baltimore and Potomac Railroad Station, Southwest Corner of Constitution Avenue and 6th Street NW
Washington, DC
Garfield was shot from behind as he was walking through the station.
As a result of failed attempts to locate the bullet which caused infections and blood poisoning he died September 19, 1881 at Elberon, New Jersey.
William McKinley
Sept. 6, 1901
Pan-American Exposition, Temple of Music, 34 Fordham Drive
Buffalo, New York
McKinley was shot at close range as he was greeting the public.
He died on September 14, 1901 in Buffalo from gangrene caused by the bullet wounds.
John F. Kennedy
Nov. 22, 1963
411 Elm Street, Dealey Plaza
Dallas, Texas
Kennedy was struck by gunshots while riding in a motorcade through downtown Dallas.
He was pronounced dead at Parkland Memorial Hospital in Dallas shortly after the shooting.
Information and Resources about the Four Presidential Assassinations
Abraham Lincoln
Abraham Lincoln's Assassination website
Abraham Lincoln Assassination from the Library of Congress
PBS' The American Experience: The Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
Documentary about the Abraham Lincoln Assassination
New York Times historic article
Abraham Lincoln Assassination artifacts from the Library of Congress
Images from the Lincoln Assassination from the Library of Congress
Abraham Lincoln Assassination and Memorial links
Biography of John Wilkes Booth (assassin of Abraham Lincoln)
Odd Facts about Abraham Lincoln Assassination
Ford's Theatre
Surratt House Museum
The Petersen House
Rich Hill
James Garfield
Garfield Assassination information from the Smithsonian
How doctors killed President Garfield from CBS News
Eyewitness to History article about the Garfield Assassination
The Assassination of Garfield: A Contemporary Account
Biography of Charles Guiteau, assassin of James Garfield
Article about Charles Guiteau from crimelibrary.com
Article about Charles Guiteau from historyhouse.com
Charles Guiteau trial
Who Killed James A. Garfield?
blog
The Stalking of the President from Smithsonian.com
Garfield Assassination historic newspapers
Guiteau and the Assassination of President Garfield
Unmarked Site of the Assassination of President Garfield
Alexander Graham Bell and the Garfield Assassination
William McKinley
The Assassination of President William McKinley from crimelibrary.com
McKinley Assassination information from buffalohistoryworks.com
Article about Anarchy and the McKinley Assassination
McKinley Assassination historic newspapers
Eyewitness to History article about the McKinley Assassination
Photographs and Images surrounding the McKinley Assassination
Leon Czolgosz biography (McKinley Assassin)
Trial of Leon Czolgosz
Images of Leon Czolgosz
McKinley Assassination article from historynet.com
Big Ben Parker and President McKinley's Assassination
History of McKinley Assassination Historical Marker
John F. Kennedy
John F. Kennedy Assassination Records from the National Archives
Historical Markers at Dealey Plaza - Dallas, Texas
The John F. Kennedy Assassination Homepage
JFK Assassination from the Mary Ferrell Foundation
JFK Assassination Web page
Kennedy Assassination website
JFK Lancer website assassination information
JFK Assassination Records Review Board
Death of the President from the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library
50 Years Later: The Assassination of President Kennedy, CNN report
JFK Assassination timeline
Video of JFK Assassination news coverage by CBS News
Video of JFK Assassination news coverage by ABC News
JFK Assassination: 50 Years Later from the Washington Post
Conspiracy Theories
10 Conspiracy Theories
Lee Harvey Oswald biography
Presidential Assassination Attempts
President
Date
Location/Address
Outcome
Andrew Jackson
Jan. 30, 1835
U.S. Capitol
Washington, DC
A man attempted to fire two guns at Jackson at close range, however, the guns did not discharge a bullet and Jackson was unharmed.
Theodore Roosevelt
(was former President at the time)
Oct. 14, 1912
Hotel Gilpatrick
333 West Kilbourne Avenue
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
After leaving the hotel and before heading to a campaign speech, a man fired on former President and current Presidential candidate Roosevelt and the bullet lodged in his chest.
The bullet was slowed by the papers from Roosevelt's speech and his glasses case.
He was not seriously injured and insisted on delivering his lengthly speech as planned.
Only after the speech did he go to the hospital for examination.
It was decided that the bullet remain in Roosevelt's body.
Franklin Roosevelt
(was President-Elect at the time)
Feb. 15, 1933
Bayfront Park
301 Biscayne Boulevard
Miami, Florida
A man fired shots at the car from which President-Elect Roosevelt had just given a speech.
Roosevelt was not hit, but the bullets hit others, including Chicago Mayor Anton Cermak who died from his wounds.
Harry Truman
Nov. 1, 1950
Blair House
1651 Pennsylvania Avenue NW
Washington, DC
Two gunmen unsuccessfully attempted to obtain entry to Blair House, where Truman was staying as the White House was being renovated.
A gun battle with the Secret Service and other guards commenced and one gunman was killed and the other wounded.
Truman was unharmed, but one White House police officer was killed.
Gerald Ford
Sept. 5, 1975
California State Capitol
1315 10th Street
Sacramento, California
A woman attempted to fire a gun at Ford as he was approaching the California Capitol.
A Secret Service agent noticed and prevented her from firing the weapon.
Gerald Ford
Sept. 22, 1975
St. Francis Hotel
335 Powell Street
San Francisco, California
Upon leaving the St. Francis Hotel a woman fired a gun at Ford.
All the shots missed and Ford was unharmed.
Ronald Reagan
March 30, 1981
Washington Hilton Hotel
1919 Connecticut Avenue NW
Washington, DC
Upon leaving the Washington Hilton Hotel, Reagan was shot by a gunman.
He was rushed to George Washington University Hospital where he underwent surgery to remove the bullet.
Reagan made a full recovery and returned to the White House on April 11, 1981.
This does not purport to be a complete list of every plot or attempt against the life of a U.S. President, but only those where an act was carried out and the President was in the immediate vicinity of the perpetrator.
Additional Information about Presidential Assassination Attempts and Security Measures
Andrew Jackson assassination attempt
The Failed Assassination Attempt on President Andrew Jackson
The Attempted Assassination of Ex-President Theodore Roosevelt book
Theodore Roosevelt Assassination Attempt
Attempted Assassination of Former President Theodore Roosevelt
Franklin D. Roosevelt assassination attempt
Attempted Assassination of FDR
Harry S. Truman assassination attempt
The Truman Assassination Attempt in the American Consciousness: A Thesis
Gun Battle on Pennsylvania Avenue - Truman assassination attempt
Gerald Ford assassination attempt
Ronald Reagan assassination attempt
Characters in Reagan assassination attempt
Reagan Oral History Project about the Assassination attempt
FBI Records relating to the Reagan assassination attempt
Political assassination
White House security
Protective Role of the Secret Service
Protective Operations of the Secret Service
Photographs of Secret Service work during Presidential Inaugural Events
History of the Secret Service
Killing the President: Assassinations, Attempts, and Rumored Attempts on U.S. Commanders-in-Chief book
The purpose of this site is to provide researchers, students, teachers, politicians, journalists, and citizens a complete resource guide to the US Presidents.
Feel free to make a link to this or any other page on this web site.
If you would like to suggest a Presidential link, report a broken link, or have any comments please contact presidents@presidentsusa.net
Copyright ©2015, by Baaron's Hill, LLC   |   Privacy Policy / Terms of Use