JAN
MAR
APR
12
2015
2016
2017
41 captures
11 Jun 12 - 3 Aug 16
Close Help
List of Topics
Lesson
Mini-Quiz
Feedback
SfC Home > History >
 
Abraham Lincoln's Son and Assassinations (1864 - 1901)
by Ron Kurtus (12 May 2012)
Robert Todd Lincoln was the oldest son of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln. He led a distinguished life in both business and government. However, he was either present or nearby when three presidential assassinations occurred: Abraham Lincoln, James A. Garfield, and William McKinley.
Because of these strange coincidences, he refused later presidential invitations to avoid the chances of something bad happening again.
Questions you may have include:
How was he related to his father's assassination?
How was he near to Garfield's assassination?
What was the relationship with McKinley's assassination?
This lesson will answer those questions.
Assassination of Abraham Lincoln
In late 1864, Robert Lincoln was saved from being killed or seriously injured when he fell between a moving train and the platform. The person who grabbed him and pulled him to safety was Edwin Booth, brother of John Wilkes Booth. This happen several months before John Wilkes Booth assassinated Robert's father.
On the evening that Lincoln was assassinated on April 11, 1865, Robert was near the Ford Theatre and arrived shortly afterwards.
Assassination of James A. Garfield
Robert Lincoln was U.S. President James A. Garfield's Secretary of War. On July 2, 1881, Lincoln was walking along with President Garfield and several others toward Williams College, where Garfield was schedule to give a speech.
At the Sixth Street Train Station in Washington, D.C., Lincoln saw Charles J. Guiteau shoot President Garfield, who died soon afterward from an infection from the wound.
Assassination of William McKinley
On September 6, 1901 Robert was invited by President William McKinley to the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York, where the President was giving a speech. An anarchist, Leon F. Czolgosz, then shot President McKinley twice in the abdomen. Lincoln was nearby but did not witness the shooting.
McKinley seemed to recover but soon died of septic poisoning.
Summary
Robert Lincoln, eldest son of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln, had his life saved by the brother of John Wilkes Booth, who assassinated his father. Robert was near the Ford Theatre when the assassination occurred. Robert witnessed the assassination of President James A. Garfield and was nearby when William McKinley was shot. Because of these strange coincidences, he refused other presidential invitations.
Lessons learned:
Being in politics can be dangerous
Don't take chances if coincidences are repeated
Strange things can happen
Resources and references
Ron Kurtus' Credentials
Websites
History Resources
Books
Killing Lincoln: The Shocking Assassination that Changed America Forever by Bill O'Reilly and Martin Dugard; Henry Holt and Co. (2011) - Best seller
Top-rated books on Abraham Lincoln
Top-rated books on James A. Garfield
Top-rated books on William McKinley
Questions and comments
Do you have any questions, comments, or opinions on this subject? If so, send an email with your feedback. I will try to get back to you as soon as possible.
Share
Click on a button to bookmark or share this page through Twitter, Facebook, email, or other services:
 
Students and researchers
The Web address of this page is:
www.school-for-champions.com/history/
lincolns_son_and_assassinations.htm
Please include it as a link on your website or as a reference in your report, document, or thesis.
Copyright © Restrictions
Where are you now?
School for Champions
History topics
Abraham Lincoln's Son and Assassinations
History topics
Oral History
1800s
Failures of Abraham Lincoln
Abraham Lincoln's Son and Assassinations
1930s
Russo-Finnish War of 1939-1940
1940s
When the Japanese Attacked Santa Barbara
1950s
"School Days" Represent Teen Attitudes
1960s
John F. Kennedy and James Bond 007
When Kennedy and Nixon Swore
Assassinations of Kennedy and Lincoln
Communist Symbols on U.S. Coins
How Lyndon Johnson Vetted Hubert Humphrey
1968: When Cops Were Pigs
1970s
How Kissinger Helped Acupuncture in the U.S.
Did Dick Tuck Cause Watergate?
Was Gerald Ford Really a Klutz?
1980s
"We Didn't Start the Fire" Lyrics
"We Didn't Start the Fire" History Summary
History of Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI)
Also see
Weekly Feedback Blog
History Survey Results
Biographies
Writing
Public Speaking
Good Character
List Your School
Let's make the world a better place
Be the best that you can be.
Use your knowledge and skills to help others succeed.
Don't be wasteful; protect our environment.
You CAN influence the world.
Live Your Life as a Champion:
Take care of your health
Seek knowledge and gain skills
Do excellent work
Be valuable to others
Have utmost character
Be a Champion!
The School for Champions helps you become the type of person who can be called a Champion.