FEB
MAR
Apr
30
2015
2016
2017
31 captures
19 Jul 13 - 30 Mar 16
Close Help
Skip to Content
University at Buffalo
University at Buffalo Libraries
Find Library Materials
My Account
Get Help
Libraries & Collections
About Us
Ask A Librarian
Pan-American Exposition of 1901
Search
About
Credits
Copyright & Use Restrictions
The Exposition
Food and Drink
Music and Musicians
Flag Day Address
Electricity and Technology
Visual Landscape
Immigrant Communities
Assassination of William McKinley
Health Care and Medical Technology
UB Digital Collection
Essays
Buy Prints
Related Resources
close
Everything
Catalog
Articles+
E-Journals
Reserve
Databases
Advanced
Advanced
University Libraries >
Find Library Materials >
Resources by Subject >
Pan-American Exposition of 1901 >
The Exposition >
The Legal Aftermath of the Assassination of William McKinley
The Exposition
Food and Drink
Music and Musicians
Flag Day Address
Electricity and Technology
Visual Landscape
The Immigrant Experience
Anarchy and Assassination
Anarchy at the Turn of the Century
Images of President William McKinley at the Pan-American Exposition
Leon Czolgosz and the Trial
Health Care and Medical Technology
The Legal Aftermath of the Assassination of William McKinley
Portrait of William McKinley. Photographer: Francis B. Johnston. Source: The Life of William McKinley, Including a Genealogical Record of the McKinley Family and Copious Extracts From the Late President's Public Speeches, Messages to Congress, Proclamations, and Other State Papers. New York, P. F. Collier & Sons, 1901.
On September 5, 1901, Leon Czolgosz unsuccessfully sought an opportunity to assassinate President McKinley at the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo. His second attempt on September 6 was successful. At the Temple of Music, while McKinley was in a greeting line, Leon Czolgosz fired two shots into the President.
James Parker
Czolgosz was wrestled to the ground by an Exposition attendee, African-American waiter James Parker, who was credited with having prevented Czolgosz from firing a third round. [See a related essay on James Parker by Daryl Rasuli.] Soldiers of the U.S. Artillery descended upon Czolgosz and began to beat him. From where he lay wounded, President McKinley was heard to have said, "Go easy on him boys."
At police headquarters the assassin was interrogated by District Attorney Thomas Penney. Czolgosz confessed that he killed the President because, "I killed President McKinley because I done my duty. I didn't believe one man should have so much service and another man shoud have none."
"The Confession of Leon Czolgosz". Source: Photocopy kindly reproduced by the Karapela's Manuscript Museum.
Surgery was performed on President McKinley by Dr. Matthew Mann. The operation began at 5:20 p.m., one hour and 20 minutes after the President was shot. The highly regarded surgeon, Roswell Park, was unavailable, so Mann, an obstetrician and gynecologist, performed the operation. In addition to Mann, the attending physicians were P.M. Rixey, Eugene Wasdin, (later) Roswell Park, and Herman Mynter.
Matthew D. Mann, M.D. Physician and Surgeon; Professor of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Universty of Buffalo. Photographer: Undetermined. Source: Men of Buffalo: A Collection of Portraits of Men Who Deserve to Rank as Typical Representatives of the Best Citizenship, Foremost Activities and Highest Aspirations of the City of Buffalo. Chicago: A.N. Marquis & Co., 1902, p. 377.
Dr. Roswell Park
Herman Mynter, M.D. Professor of Operative Surgery, University of Buffalo; Surgeon to German and German Deaconess Hospitals. Photographer: Undetermined. Source: Men of Buffalo: A Collection of Portraits of Men Who Deserve to Rank as Typical Representatives of the Best Citizenship, Foremost Activities and Highest Aspirations of the City of Buffalo. Chicago:A.N. Marquis & Co., 1902, p. 390.
On September 14, 1901 President McKinley died of gangrene at the home of John G. Milburn, president of the Pan-American Exposition. After the final funeral service in Washington, D.C. on September 17th, McKinley's body was returned to his home of Canton, Ohio and entombed at the Westlawn Cemetery.
By the time the body had been laid to rest, the Erie County Bar Association had assigned two honorable defense attorneys to what they termed the "distasteful task" of providing counsel to the assassin. Members of the local bar who were involved with the trial were presiding Judge Truman C. White, District Attorney Thomas Penney, as well as defense attorneys Hon. Loran Lewis and the Hon. Robert Titus. The jurors reached a verdict in little more than 30 minutes. On September 26, 1901 at 2:00 p.m. Judge White sentenced Leon Czolgosz to death by electric chair at Auburn State Prison. He was executed October 29, 1901.
Police Photograph and Report of Leon Czolgosz. Photographer: Unidentified. Source: Facsimile of the Police Report filed September 6, 1901. Department of Police, Buffalo N.Y., Bureau of Identification. Facsimile courtesy of the Buffalo and Erie County Historical Society.
The assassination of President McKinley by an avowed anarchist, only compounded Americans' fears, already stirred by such recent events as the assassinations of King Humberto of Italy and Empress Elizabeth of Austria and the Haymarket and Homestead riots in the United States. The focus of this fear was the anarchist movement, and the relationship of this ideology to immigrants. State and federal legislation began to target anarchists, with bills being introduced almost immediately to expel avowed anarchists from the country and to prohibit their entry into the United States from other countries. One such statute, the Alien Immigration Act of 1903, is discussed in Anarchy at the Turn of the Century.
See the following pages:
Anarchy at the Turn of the Century
Images of William McKinley at the Pan-American Exposition
Leon Czolgosz and the Trial
University Libraries >
Find Library Materials >
Resources by Subject >
Pan-American Exposition of 1901 >
The Exposition >
The Legal Aftermath of the Assassination of William McKinley
Find Library Materials
Everything
Catalog
Electronic Journals
Course Reserve
Databases
Delivery+
Forms A-Z
Resources by Subject
My Account
Login
Get Help
Help A - Z
Research Tips
Instructional Services
Faculty Support
Student Support
Alumni & Visitor Support
Endnote Software
Ask A Librarian
Chat
Text
Email
Phone
In Person
Libraries & Collections
Architecture & Planning
Digital Collections
Health Sciences Library
Law Library
Libraries Annex
Lockwood Library
Multimedia Collections
Music Library
Silverman Library
Special Collections
About Us
Contact Us
Hours / Floor Plans / Power
Policies & Services
Staff Directory
Library Administration
Events & Workshops
Library Exhibits
Employment
Library Store
Support Our Libraries
Connect with Us
RSS Feeds
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
Pinterest
SEARCH
University at Buffalo Libraries
© 2016 University at Buffalo. All rights reserved.
Site Search
Terms of Use
Privacy
Accessibility