First, the Mongols attacked Russia:
Quote:
1237-40 - Mongols invade Russia, destroying all of its main cities except Novgorod and Pskov; Tatars establish the empire of the Golden Horde in southern Russia. ( BBC )
Then, Christians attacked Russia, a couple of years later:
Quote:
The Battle of the Ice...was a battle between the Republic of Novgorod and the Livonian branch of the Teutonic Knights (whose army consisted mostly of Estonians) on April 5, 1242, at Lake Peipus...
The battle was a significant defeat sustained by Roman Catholic crusaders during the Northern Crusades, which were directed against pagans and Eastern Orthodox Christians rather than Muslims in the Holy Land. The crusaders' defeat in the battle marked the end of their campaigns against the Orthodox Novgorod Republic and other Russian territories for the next century. ( wikipedia )
And then, Mongols attacked Iraq, with Christian assistance (cp. Khan Hulagu's wife was Christian), some years thereafter:
Quote:
The Siege of Baghdad, which occurred in 1258, was an invasion, siege and sacking of the city of Baghdad, the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate at the time, and the modern-day capital of Iraq, by the Ilkhanate Mongol forces along with other allied troops under Hulagu Khan...
The invasion left Baghdad in a state of total destruction... Baghdad remained depopulated and in ruins for several centuries, and the event is widely regarded as the end of the Islamic Golden Age...
[The Mongol army] contained a large contingent of various units from Christian vassals, chief among them apparently the Georgians, who were eager to avenge the sacking of their capital, Tiflis, decades earlier by Jalal al-Din Khwarazmshah. Other participating Christian forces were the Armenian army, led by their king, and some Frankish troops from the Principality of Antioch ( wikipedia )
Note that "the Ilkhanate initially embraced many religions, but was particularly sympathetic to Buddhism and Christianity" ( wikipedia ).
QUESTION -- does the above suggest any kind of (loose) coordination-of-action, between Christians, and their Mongol allies, in the mid-13th century AD ?
 