Could You Be Blind?
April 1, 2014
John 9:1-16
Satire is a very popular form of comedy in American culture. From shows like Futurama and The Simpsons to Saturday Night Live’s Weekend Update and Comedy Central’s The Daily Show, satire is everywhere in our entertainment programming. It is always meant to be funny (although it often fails dramatically) but often, satire has a subplot of social criticism.
We come by a love of satire through our Western European roots. But, its beginnings in “media” go a long way back. In 1568, Flemish renaissance artist Pieter Bruegel produced a painting entitled, The Blind Leading the Blind. Many art historians consider The Blind Leading the Blind to be one of the “masterworks of painting for its fine, accurate detail and dynamic composition.”
The Blind Leading the Blind by Pieter Bruegel
It is the earliest surviving painting to depict the Biblical of the blind leading the blind from the Gospel of Matthew (15:14). But, the painting is also political satire! It speaks to a time when the Spanish were attempting to enforce rule over the Netherlands and suppress the rise of Protestantism. As with all satire that is based on current events, the farther away from the events you are, the more difficult it is to understand. No one is really sure if the painting was in support of Protestantism or the Catholic church.
The story at its root, however, is unmistakable. Matthew relates an episode in Jesus’ ministry when the Rabbi said something that offended the Pharisees. When his disciples asked about it he said, “Leave them; they are blind guides. If a blind man leads a blind man, both will fall into a pit.”
“Blindness” was one of Jesus’ favorite themes. This morning I want to look at an example that is found in the Gospel of John. Turn with me to John 9:1-16.
JN 9:1 As he went along, he saw a man blind from birth. 2 His disciples asked him, “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?”
JN 9:3 “Neither this man nor his parents sinned,” said Jesus, “but this happened so that the work of God might be displayed in his life. 4 As long as it is day, we must do the work of him who sent me. Night is coming, when no one can work. 5 While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.”
JN 9:6 Having said this, he spit on the ground, made some mud with the saliva, and put it on the man’s eyes. 7 “Go,” he told him, “wash in the Pool of Siloam” (this word means Sent). So the man went and washed, and came home seeing.
JN 9:8 His neighbors and those who had formerly seen him begging asked, “Isn’t this the same man who used to sit and beg?” 9 Some claimed that he was.
Others said, “No, he only looks like him.”
But he himself insisted, “I am the man.”
JN 9:10 “How then were your eyes opened?” they demanded.
JN 9:11 He replied, “The man they call Jesus made some mud and put it on my eyes. He told me to go to Siloam and wash. So I went and washed, and then I could see.”
JN 9:12 “Where is this man?” they asked him.
“I don’t know,” he said.
JN 9:13 They brought to the Pharisees the man who had been blind. 14 Now the day on which Jesus had made the mud and opened the man’s eyes was a Sabbath. 15 Therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. “He put mud on my eyes,” the man replied, “and I washed, and now I see.”
JN 9:16 Some of the Pharisees said, “This man is not from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath.” But others asked, “How can a sinner do such miraculous signs?” So they were divided.
May the Lord add his blessing to the reading of the Word.
You should be aware that this passage follows soon after Jesus’ statement in 8:12,  “I am the light of the world. Whoever follows me will never walk in darkness, but will have the light of life.”
Jesus had healed the blind previously, but this man was “blind from birth.” It prompted the disciples to ask, “who sinned, this man or his parents?” It seems a callous question, but reflects the Jewish belief that if a person suffered from an ailment, it must have originated with the sin of their parents or grandparents. This is based on Exodus 34:7, which says, “he punishes the children and their children for the sin of the fathers to the third and fourth generation.”
But, Jesus was having none of it! From his viewpoint this was not a punishment but an opportunity to glorify God! His “night” was coming soon and Jesus was not going to miss this opportunity to heal bodies and minds! Jesus was certainly capable of healing this man without the mud mixture he used on his eyes. Perhaps it was an aid for the man’s faith. The blind man now had a reason to be a faithful participant in his own healing. He had to go and wash. Notice that Jesus did not even tell him that he would be healed! The walk to the Pool of Siloam was a walk of faith!
The man’s healing was so dramatic, so life-changing that people that knew him questioned if it was the same man.  “No, he only looks like him.” His change was so startling, that he had to reassure them that he was the man they knew! His testimony of the events was very simple. Just the facts! I did what Jesus said and then I could see!
Here is where the story takes a turn. The neighbors (perhaps fearing something was wrong) took the man to their leaders. What did the Pharisees notice about this event? What was important to the Pharisees? Not that the man was healed. Not that this Rabbi had incredible power. No! This Rabbi Jesus had (once again) broken the Sabbath law. Their unswerving adherence to their own understanding of Torah law brought them to one conclusion. “This man is not from God, for he does not keep the Sabbath.” Their suspicions were confirmed. He does not understand our religion the way we do, so, therefore, God cannot be in what he does.
I do not know if you hear it, but I hear a familiar voice in this passage. Someone asked,
“How can a sinner do such miraculous signs?” That voice sounds like Nicodemus to me! We have no direct evidence of that. Except that Nicodemus had already spoken up for Jesus in the Sanhedrin in John 7:50-51. When he came to Jesus he said, For no one could perform the miraculous signs you are doing if God were not with him. This moment of compassionate healing gave the blind man an opportunity to express his faith. It also gave another  (perhaps Nicodemus) an opportunity to stand for Jesus.
This is one of those scripture passages that could be the foundation for many, many sermons. Luckily for you, today I am preaching just one! But, there are three lessons I want to point out.
First, Jesus asked the blind man to participate in the healing. Jesus called it the work of God;  “the work of him who sent me.” In order for God to be “displayed in his life,” Jesus asked him to walk across town with mud on his face. This was no small task for the blind man. That act of obedience bolstered his faith and gave him a message for unbelievers. Jesus can and will heal you of the “blindness” in your life! But do not surprised when he requires your participation! Take an active part in the spiritual life that Jesus has for you and you will able to testify to the love and care of God!
Secondly, when the hand of Jesus opens new spiritual eyes for you, do not be surprised if your friends and neighbors do not recognize you anymore! Under his healing hand, you have become a “new creature.” You will have work to do with which they are not familiar. You have the opportunity (while it is still day) to speak directly of the change Jesus has made in you. Do it boldly, because that is God being displayed in your life.
And third, when we become convinced that we know all the spiritual truth, there is a temptation to use our religious assumptions as a hammer! The men who were truly blind in this story were the Pharisees! They were so confident that they understood exactly what God wanted that they did not know the Son of God when they looked him in the face. As my favorite singer once said, “they forgot to remember, you might be wrong!” [i]
Using your spiritual assumptions to alienate and categorize people is a symptom of spiritual blindness. I am not saying that you cannot have certainty in your faith in Jesus Christ. What I am telling you is that we must be living lives of faith that express spiritual humility.
Participate in your salvation. Be prepared to be a new person! And live a life of spiritual humility and you will be a part of the work of God in the world.
 
[i] From the song You Might Be Wrong on an album entitled Pimps and Preachers by Paul Thorn 06/21/2010
Share this: