EYELESS WITH BRUEGEL
By Leigh Hafrey; Leigh Hafrey is an editor of The Book Review.
Published: January 26, 1986
THE PARABLE OF THE BLIND By Gert Hofmann.
Translated by Christopher Middleton.
152 pp.
New York: Fromm International Publishing.
$14.95.
THE prizewinning West German playwright and essayist Gert Hofmann began publishing fiction in 1979, at the age of 47.
He is so far known in this country by two novels, ''The Spectacle at the Tower'' (for which he won the coveted Alfred Doblin Prize in 1982) and ''Our Conquest'' (1984).
They are long, grotesque studies in man's inhumanity to man, the former set in a desolate corner of modern Sicily, the latter in Germany on the spring day in 1945 that saw the end of the Nazi Reich.
In these, as in the rest of his fiction, Mr. Hofmann's characters - particularly his narrators - seem ready to sink beneath the weight of the gruesome, often ambiguous information they are asked to convey.
The action suggests frenzy even when the motive for such a state is not evident; the dialogues are a mass of sentences broken and then fleshed out by environmental noise, like the soundtrack of a Robert Altman film in transcription.
Mr. Hofmann's narration becomes an explication of the unsayable as he fills the gaps left by these failed attempts at communication.
So it is a pleasure to pick up his most recent work, ''The Parable of the Blind,'' and find it not only short, like the best of Mr. Hofmann's fiction to date, but written in deliberately short and yet complete sentences that invite the reader's confidence.
The subject is Bruegel's painting of the same name: in the Pulitzer Prize-winning ''Pictures From Brueghel and Other Poems'' (1962), William Carlos Williams called the canvas ''this horrible but superb painting,'' a laconic gloss on an equally laconic pictorial reading of Matthew 15:14 -''Let [ the Pharisees ] alone: they be blind leaders of the blind.
And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch.''
For Bruegel there were six blind men, winding their way across a sere landscape dominated by a village church and a stream into which they topple one after another.
Mr. Hofmann gives four of them names: Ripolus, the leader, who can see just well enough to tell light from darkness; Slit Man, blinded for stealing; Bellejambe, once a soldier; and Malente, who at odd moments begins to sing the praises of the Lord who allowed him to go blind.
In the middle are two unnamed figures, the narrative ''we'' of the story, who are at once themselves and all six blind men and - in the universalizing style of parables - mankind at large.
For if Bruegel's blind men are alone in the landscape, Gert Hofmann's canvas is crowded with people.
His six figures are not on an abstract journey; they are roused from sleep on the day they are to be painted by the artist, who wants, as we learn late in the book, to have one last try at putting ''everything he had to say about the world'' into a single picture.
The six men are fetched from the barn where they've been dreaming by a man called ''the knocker,'' led to breakfast by ''the child,'' cleaned up after their meal by ''the woman'' Lise, and watched off and on throughout the day by a host of others, named and unnamed, whom the blind men cannot see but of whom they are always uncomfortably aware.
The human community is to them a fading reality, a world that demands too much of them in their handicapped state.
They want to let go, as the narrator indicates in his discussion of Ripolus's leadership skills: ''Many of the words he once knew, the words from before, as he calls them, he's already forgotten, at least half of them, no wonder his sentences (and ours) are getting shorter and shorter.
Compared with the sentences from before they aren't even sentences.
But none of this disturbs him, because he believes that when all the words have been forgotten, then there'll be nothing above, beneath, before, or inside us.
And if he does (or we do) still remember an old sort of word, or if somebody speaks such a word, he doesn't know if the thing is still behind the word and how he's to think about it.
A larch tree clearing?
Good, but how?
A twilight?
Fine, but what's that?''
In the interim, though, Bruegel wants to paint them.
Intent on realism, he has them practice walking to the creek that runs by his house and, as they begin crossing the bridge, has them fall, screaming, into the water, still icy from the winter.
Eager to catch the desolation he sees as intrinsic to the human condition, he has them go through the motions over and over until he gets the pink of their distended mouths just right.
THE paradox is evident, and conveys the paradox of Gert Hofmann's own work.
If he chooses to talk, in ''The Parable of the Blind,'' about a failure of perception and the evanescence of language, he does so with an acuity worthy of the Flemish master himself.
There is an earthiness to this book, an immediacy of sensory impression that is enhanced by the continuing, very cerebral meditation on the contradictions of art, and that comes through in the smallest details: the squealing of a stuck pig, the saltpeter sweating from the walls of Bruegel's house in the spring floods.
All are rendered in a fluent translation by Christopher Middleton, who did the English versions of the author's two earlier American releases.
Mr. Hofmann displays the linguistic concision of a poet here, and develops a dramatic tension lacking in his other novels.
But if this short book marks a turning point in his fiction - the blind men speak at one point of standing where ''one region of the world ends and goes over into another'' - it is not merely a stylistic change.
The ''we'' so freely used by the narrator includes the reader, after all, as well as the artist, a kind of deity who presides both in and beyond the work.
Within this community (at its worst called complicity), the grotesque turns spiritual, revealing the oxymoronic potential of the phrase ''blind faith.''
Photo of Bruegel the Elder's ''Parable of the Blind''