SEP
MAR
Apr
22
2014
2016
2017
21 captures
3 May 11 - 13 Apr 16
Close Help
God
Live Joyfully
Inspirational Verses
Favorite Bible Verses
Happy Words
Inspirational Songs
Videos
Daily Verses
Magnets
Parables
Need Christian Encouragement?
Joyful Living Blog
Christian Jokes
Search
The Parable of the Blind Leading the Blind Meaning, Bible Verse, Quotes; The Blind Man Leading the Blind Quote & Explanation – A Parable of Jesus on Spiritual Discernment
Parable of the Blind Leading the Blind Meaning, plus:
Blind Leading the Blind Bible Verse, Quotes & Meaning
The Parable of the Blind Leading the Blind (sometimes known as The Parable of the Blind Man Leading the Blind, or simply as “Blind Leading the Blind”) is a parable told by Jesus in The Bible.
It touches on several important lessons and is a warning to us regarding the importance of spiritual discernment concerning what we are doing, where we are going, who we are leading and who we are following (i.e. spiritual discernment and awareness about false teachers, false prophets, false teachings and false doctrines).
The surrounding Bible verses also go further to warn us against hypocrisy.
All in all, we are strongly reminded about how important it is to wisely and with God’s help, focus on the most important things in our walk with God, not getting carried away by legalities and religious observations, or thinking we are saved by our own works.
Jesus’ blind leading the blind quote “Can a blind man lead a blind man?
Will they not both fall into a pit?”
is also expanded upon and explored.
The Parable of The Blind Leading The Blind compels us to examine and reexamine what is truly important in living our lives as Christians, contrasting outwardly religious acts to what is deep inside our hearts.
Furthermore, it is yet another reminder to place our trust in God, not man.
Salvation is not found in any man or woman, but through our Lord and savior Jesus Christ.
The Parable of the Blind Leading the Blind is taken from two New Testament books in the Bible – Luke and Matthew.
Below, we first explore the Parable of the Blind Leading the Blind meaning and explanation.
Please scroll down for Blind Leading the Blind Bible Verse & Quotes.
There are two sets of Bible verses, first from Luke, then from Matthew.
By the way, there is also a popular painting based on this parable – of six blind men, by Pieter Bruegel.
In The Luke Parable of the Blind Leading the Blind Bible Verse reference (Luke 6:39 – 42, scroll down to see Bible quotes & scriptures),  Jesus starts by saying: “Can a blind man lead a blind man?
Will they not both fall into a pit?”
Jesus then goes on to give practical examples as well as consequences of being “blind” and hypocritical.
The Matthew Parable of the Blind Leading the Blind Bible Verse reference (Matthew 15:10-20, scroll down to see Bible quotes & scriptures) has a longer and more detailed description, along with the meaning and explanation of the parable.
In the Matthew Parable reference, the disciples of Jesus ask Him to explain the parable to them, and Jesus goes ahead to explain.
May God bless and minister to us all as we read.
May we continually gain knowledge and practical wisdom from His teachings.
May we never forget or ignore all we are learning, but continually apply all that we learn into our daily lives.
Amen.
~~~~~***~~~~~
Blind Leading the Blind Meaning & Explanation
(Please scroll further down for Bible Verses & Quotes)
The Parable of The Blind Leading The Blind compels us to examine and reexamine what is truly important in living our lives as Christians.
It contrasts outwardly religious and often pretentious acts to what is truly important – what is deep inside of us, what is deep inside our hearts, our faith in God, trust in God and obedience to God.
In The Bible days, there were several rules about what to eat and what not to eat, and a great deal of emphasis was placed on washing your hands, and so on.
The Pharisees and religious leaders of the day put a lot of importance on all these things.
It became easy for many to believe that as long as one kept those rules and regulations, they were fine with God – even if their inner hearts and thoughts were far away from God.
Jesus called this attitude and common occurrence an example of the blind leading the blind.
If our focus is on outwardly acts of religion, if what we care about the most is what others can see, then we are blind, and whoever is following us is blind…and we are all on a road to destruction in that case (God forbid)!
Conversely, if our hearts are right with God, everything else with ultimately fall into place, and by God’s grace we will live lives that are truly pleasing to God – regardless of what others might think of us.
This parable also serves as a strong warning to us to be careful who we follow blindly.
We need to continually put our trust in God, not in man.
This is not to minimize the importance of good, God-led spiritual leaders, teachers and role models.
But we have to remember ask God to continually give us wisdom as well as spiritual discernment, so that we do not just follow anybody that claims to be on the right path blindly.
The following scriptures are a reminder of this discussion:
On wisdom, searching for wisdom & asking God for wisdom:
James 1:5 (ESV) “If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask God, who gives generously to all without reproach, and it will be given him.”
Proverbs 2:1-5(NASB)
“My son, if you will receive my words
And treasure my commandments within you,
Make your ear attentive to wisdom, Incline your heart to understanding;
For if you cry for discernment, Lift your voice for understanding;
If you seek her as silver, And search for her as for hidden treasures;
Then you will discern the fear of the LORD
And discover the knowledge of God.”
On spiritual discernment:
John 7:24(NCV)
“Stop judging by the way things look, but judge by what is really right.”
1 John 4:1(ESV)
“Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits to see whether they are from God, for many false prophets have gone out into the world.”
We have to rely on the help of God’s Holy Spirit to lead us, guide us, help us to grow and know God more and more each day, and to understand exactly what God desires and expects from us.
We have to pray that God will give us wisdom to know right from wrong.
Those who teach false doctrines blindly, as well as those who blindly follow these false doctrines, will all end up in a pit (or a ditch)!
The Parable of the Blind Leading the Blind – Things to Consider
Whose teachings are we following?
Whose examples are we following?
Are we following spiritual leaders blindly, or are we being discerning, trusting and following God’s leading, and making sure whatever we are involved in lines up with God’s truth?
Let’s pray to God to open our eyes and help us see!
Let’s pray to God to help us to be spiritually discerning, that we may not unknowingly follow anyone into a pit!
And let’s pray to God concerning those who may look to us for guidance, those whom we are ‘leading’ by example, mentorship or otherwise, let us pray that God may help us to lead them aright – as He desires.
May we never ever lead others astray.
Amen.
Helpful prayer for God to open our eyes:
Psalm 119:18 (ESV)
“Open my eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of your law.”
Related helpful prayer for leaders to pray:
1 Kings 3:9 (ESV)
“Give your servant therefore an understanding mind to govern your people, that I may discern between good and evil, for who is able to govern this your great people?”
~~~~~***~~~~~
Parable of the Blind Leading the Blind – Bible Verse & Quotes (1)
Luke 6:39-42 (ESV)
“He also told them a parable: Can a blind man lead a blind man?
Will they not both fall into a pit?
A disciple is not above his teacher, but everyone when he is fully trained will be like his teacher.
Why do you see the speck that is in your brother’s eye, but do not notice the log that is in your own eye?
How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, let me take out the speck that is in your eye,’ when you yourself do not see the log that is in your own eye?
You hypocrite, first take the log out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to take out the speck that is in your brother’s eye.”
~~~~~***~~~~~
Parable of the Blind Leading the Blind – Bible Verse & Quotes (2)
Matthew 15:10-20 (ESV)
What Defiles a Person
“And he called the people to him and said to them, “Hear and understand: it is not what goes into the mouth that defiles a person, but what comes out of the mouth; this defiles a person.”
Then the disciples came and said to him, “Do you know that the Pharisees were offended when they heard this saying?”
He answered, “Every plant that my heavenly Father has not planted will be rooted up.
Let them alone; they are blind guides.
And if the blind lead the blind, both will fall into a pit.”
But Peter said to him, “Explain the parable to us.”
And he said,
“Are you also still without understanding?
Do you not see that whatever goes into the mouth passes into the stomach and is expelled?
But what comes out of the mouth proceeds from the heart, and this defiles a person.
For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false witness, slander.
These are what defile a person.
But to eat with unwashed hands does not defile anyone.”
Explore & Enjoy: Inspirational Bible Verses & Quotes; Inspirational Scriptures, Passages, & Bible Scriptures
Search Encouraging & Inspirational Bible Verses & Quotes; Inspirational & Encouraging Scriptures, Passages, Bible Stories:
Custom Search
Inspirational & Encouraging Bible Verses; Motivational & Uplifting Bible Verses
Favorite Inspirational & Encouraging Bible Verses
Bible Verses for Athletes
Bible Verses about God’s Unfailing & Unconditional Love for Us
Bible Verses for Teenagers, Youth
Bible Verses for Women
Bible Verses about Following Jesus
Bible Verses for Breakups, Heartbreak
Bible Verses for Children, Babies, Kids
Favorite Verses
Bible Verses for College Students
Bible Verses about Hard Times
Bible Verses about God’s Will
List of Parables in the Bible
Bible Verses for Sports
Bible Verses for Students
Get Daily Bible Verses Sent to Email
Favorite, Famous, Best, Top, Nice, Unusual, Useful, Popular, Uncommon, Great, Wonderful List of Bible Verses
Bible Verses By Topic
Contact/Advertise/Report an Ad      Christian Fridge Magnets (Wholesale & Retail)      PRIVACY, Terms, & Bible Copyright
Inspiration for Joyful Living - Daily Christian Inspiration - Live, Love, Laugh, Trust God!
Copyright © Jolly Notes LLC (JollyNotes.com) - All Rights Reserved.