Feb
MAR
Apr
30
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
30 Mar 16 - 30 Mar 16
Close Help
Pages
Marcel Proust
Monday, August 17, 2015
Bruegel: The Blind leading the Blind
.
At the time there was war between Catholics and Protestants.
They killed  each other on the question whether faith alone was sufficient to reach  heaven or whether good works were of prime importance.
Bruegel: The Blind Leading the_Blind
In public domain according to http://www.wikiart.org/ 
Because of this quarrel, some charities lost prestige and beggars became suspect of using make-up to fool soft hearts.
It is not known whether the lurid diagonal composition with that Catholic church in the background is meant to cover up or expose political anger.
Bruegel may have been a Calvinist*** and had to fear the Inquisition.
This would at least explain why so little is known about his life.
It might also explain why even now his work is sometimes described and sold as "landscape paintings".
--
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pieter_Bruegel_the_Elder
This child is from a painting called "Peasant Wedding".
It's not the only place where he makes a child look so silly.
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons
All the beauty and at times very much of it, goes into some distant background.
The people are ugly and silly, mostly, and unhappy.
It is difficult to find a beautiful lady, for instance, though I think there are some in a famous painting by him, where  a lpicnic party or some public fiesta seems to be going on, but in fact it is the hour before the execution of Jesus who is almost invisible, though placed in the center of the composition, dragging his cross up the hill:
http://artboom.info/painting/painting-classics/painting-classics-pieter-bruegel-the-elder.html
There, in the foreground, there are some ladies in beautiful robes: the Virgin Mary and her friends attending the terrible celebration.
Next to them there is a white horse to draw your attention to a bar just aboe it: the cross, and Jesus falling beneath it.
Posted by
anagasto at
4:33 PM
Email This BlogThis!
Share to Twitter Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest
Labels: Art , Bruegel
No comments:
Post a Comment
Newer Post Older Post Home
Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom)
reminder
"The modern contention that man can "change the world" ( ... ) is not unreasonable.
One can even safely go much beyond it and say that man can expel nature with a hayfork."
Leo Strauss
Natural Right, a History
http://tinyurl.com/zl77no9
Google Books, page 201
Search This Blog
Loading...
Top Posts
Antonio Machado
.
Aged 44, this poet took an exam in philosophy perhaps to increase what he earned as a French teacher first in Soria and then i..
.
Krähe, Fuchs und Käse
In einem Garten stand da ein Tischchen, auf dem Tischchen lag ein Stück Käs, und eine Krähe sah's, flog hin, nahm den K..
.
Russian War Photos -- Kriegfotos
.
A plane piloted by Lieutenant Francis Thompson attacks a Japanese patrol.
B-25 атакует японский сторожевик  http://waralbum.ru/...
What is the Noble Lie
As a concept The Noble Lie  was launched by Plato through Socrates.
It is Socrates who in The Republic  explains the idea in a long conf...
Nazi Star Architekt
.
Der Börsenkrach in 1929 und  Wirtschaftskrise brachten Arbeitslosigkeit nach Deutschland.
>> English version >>>  h..
.
Bruegel: The Blind leading the Blind
.
At the time there was war between Catholics and Protestants.
They killed  each other on the question whether faith alone was sufficien...
Kant: What is Enlightenment ?
Kant's  Critique is a wonderful book, full of great things like an old  museum where they had to fire the caretaker because there are...
Socrates: Has the Ship Come In ?
This was in 399 BC, when Socrates was seventy years old.
The court comprised 501 citizens and belonged to a larger court of six ...
Karl Popper on Heraclitus
.
Heraclit’s most frequently quoted saying is “ You can’t step into the same river twice”.
It  means that  life, thought and matter are...
Proust : The Goodnight Kiss
One evening, because of a visit,  his mother did not come upstairs to say goodnight and, after waiting for a long time,  Proust ...
roadside graffiti
About Me
anagasto
My first language was Swiss German and next came French, as we lived near bilingual Biel/Bienne.
Now I would also like to try and translate some of my English posts into German, for I am not a polyglot at all.
I can pray only in French,  write fluently only in English, speak fluently nowhere really .....         .
View my complete profile
Simple template.
Powered by Blogger .