Feb
MAR
Apr
22
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
22 Mar 16 - 22 Mar 16
Close Help
Fun Trivia |
Quizzes |
Games |
People |
Services |
Help |
Me
New Player - Log In
Archive of Trivia Questions and Fun Facts
"The Blind Leading the Blind" is a 1568 painting depicting the Biblical parable from the gospel of Saint Matthew.
Which Flemish Renaissance artist was the painter?
Questions » Humanities » Art » Art By Subject »
Your Art Gallery: Allegorical Paintings
The answer is: Pieter Bruegel the Elder
Interesting Information:
We have seen the work of Pieter Bruegel the Elder elsewhere in this virtual gallery.
One of the greatest artists of the Renaissance period, Bruegel was born in Breda, Netherlands around 1525 and is best known for his landscapes and peasant scenes.
Painted just a year before the artist's death, "The Blind Leading the Blind, Blind" (also sometimes called "The Parable of the Blind") shows figures with different afflictions of the eye finding their way in a disorderly line.
Painted in distemper on linen canvas, this painting can be seen at the Museo di Capodimonte in Naples, Italy.
Author and Accuracy:
Written by EnglishJedi as part of the quiz:
Your Art Gallery: Allegorical Paintings - Play Quiz  Now
Question was added to the FunTrivia website on Jul 31 15.
Over 258 players have played a quiz with this question in it without  reporting an error.
Other Similar Questions & Answers
Who was the Flemish Renaissance painter whi, ca. 1466-1473, created the great masterpiece called 'Last Judgment' under the patronage of Angelo Tani?
-
The Early Renaissance
- Go To Question
In his poem 'Musee des Beaux Arts', W.H. Auden describes the painting '(The Fall of) Icarus'.
Which Flemish painter made this painting?
-
20th Century English Poetry
- Go To Question
"Blind leading blind/Never hear the laughter": which song from the "True Colors" album are those lyrics from?
-
15 Deadly Cyns
- Go To Question
FunTrivia questions are for entertainment purposes and are not guaranteed accurate, although our community does its best to correct errors.
Submit corrections about this question here .