Tough Guys of Ipswich
Gordon Harris / January 15, 2014
The next time you’re waiting in the seemingly interminable lines at the Ipswich Post Office, an interesting way to pass the time is by studying the large mural that covers the wall over the postmaster’s office door. The mural was painted in 1941 as part of the New Deal Public Works of Art Project by Saul Levine and depicts the town leaders of Ipswich gathered in opposition to a new tax imposed by the English crown. The act of opposition is also commemorated in the seal of the town of Ipswich , which bears the words, “The Birthplace of American Independence 1687”.
An emergency town meeting was called by John Andrews, chairman of the Ipswich selectmen to debate a new tax imposed by the crown-appointed governor Sir Edmund Andros. Rev. Wise, John Andrews, town clerk John Appleton, Samuel Appleton, William Goodhue, Robert Kinsman, and Thomas French were arrested, tried before the court in Boston, and imprisoned.
Ipswich muralist Alan Pearsall honored local “bad boy” and bail holdout Samuel Appleton with prominence in the right corner of the Ipswich Riverwalk Mural. Below him to the left are his brother John Appleton, Rev. John Wise and other Ipswich town leaders being arrested.
These were sturdy men who had built Ipswich, hardened veterans of  King Phillips War and the campaign against the French in Quebec. The king had just tossed out the rules and placed a bureaucrat named Sir Edmund Andros in charge of a new “Dominion of New England”.
The Reverend John Wise was outraged. A born rabble-rouser, he jumped on his horse and flew from Chebacco Parish to call on brothers Sam and John Appleton. Along with several other town leaders they planned their strategy and in a hurriedly-called meeting the next day convinced residents to stand firm against unjust taxation and the loss of local rule. The town had already voted unanimously on Feb 11, 1685 against the surrender of the charter, and at this meeting refused to appoint a tax collector. Andros sent soldiers to Ipswich, and Rev. Wise, John Andrews, John Appleton, Samuel Appleton, William Goodhue, Robert Kinsman, and Thomas French were arrested and hauled off to Boston.
The Ipswich Post Office Mural portrays these events.
At the sham trial our brave townsmen based their defense on the Magna Carta of England to which one of the judges asserted, “You must not think the laws of England follow us to the ends of the earth. Mr. Wise, you have no more privileges left you, than not to be sold as slaves.” They were imprisoned for several weeks, fined up to £50 each, and eventually released under £500 bond for each individual, quite a sum in that day. Sam Appleton refused to pay bond , scorned even the appearance of submission, made no petition for bail, and he refused to make any apology. He was kept a prisoner from November until March in an unheated dungeon.
Sir Edmund Andros is hauled to jail in Boston
News of the Ipswich resistance spread throughout the colony. On April 18, 1689 a group of provincial militia and citizens gathered in Boston and arrested several “Dominion” officials as well as several suspected sympathizers. Major Samuel Appleton helped escort Andros to Castle Island in Boston Harbor as a prisoner. Leaders of the former Massachusetts Bay Colony then reclaimed control of the government, rescinded the tax order, and Andros was shipped back to England, where at about the same time the Prince of Orange put down James II. It was a taste of things to come almost nine decades later in the Revolution of 1776.
Share this: