Colonies in Crisis
About Watch and Favorite
Watch
Watching this resources will notify you when proposed changes or new versions are created so you can keep track of improvements that have been made.
Favorite
Favoriting this resource allows you to save it in the “My Resources” tab of your account. There, you can easily access this resource later when you’re ready to customize it or assign it to your students.
Colonies in Crisis
The events of the Glorious Revolution in England had tumultuous repercussions for British colonies in America.
Learning Objective
Analyze colonial tensions that emerged as a result of James II's policies
Key Points
The Catholic King James II sought to bring colonies in America more closely under the control of the crown by creating the Dominion of New England . In 1689, colonists in Boston revolted and deposed Sir Edmund Andros , governor of the Dominion.
That same year, Leisler's Rebellion, led by militia captain Jacob Leisler, seized control of part of the colony of New York .
Coode's Rebellion, led by John Coode, rebelled against the purportedly Catholic colonial government of Maryland.
Terms
Register for FREE to remove ads and unlock more features! Learn more
Full Text
On April 18, 1689, a well-organized "mob" of provincial militia and citizens formed in the city of Boston. They arrested dominion officials as a protest against the rule of Sir Edmund Andros, the governor of the Dominion of New England. Andros, commissioned governor of New England in 1686, had earned the enmity of the local populace by enforcing the restrictive Navigation Acts , denying the validity of existing land titles, restricting town meetings , and appointing unpopular regular officers to lead colonial militia, among other actions that were part of an attempt to bring the colonies under the closer control of the crown.
Furthermore, he had infuriated Puritans in Boston by promoting the Church of England , which was disliked by many Nonconformist New England colonists. Members of the Church of England, believed by Puritans to sympathize with the administration of the dominion, were also taken into custody by the rebels. Neither faction sustained casualties during the revolt. Leaders of the former Massachusetts Bay Colony then reclaimed control of the government. In other colonies, members of governments displaced by the dominion were returned to power.
Following similar frustrations against the rule and policies of James II as the Bostonians, German American merchant and militia captain Jacob Leisler seized control of the southern part of the colony of New York and ruled it from 1689 to 1691. Royal authority was not restored until 1691, when English troops and a new governor were sent to New York. Leisler was arrested by these forces, who tried him for treason . Leisler was convicted and executed, but the revolt left the colony polarized and bitterly split into two rival factions.
Maryland saw Coode's rebellion, or the Protestant Revolution of 1689. This was an armed insurrection by Maryland Protestants against the colonial government, seen by the rebels as dominated by Catholicism. The insurrection drew its name from John Coode, the militant and colorful leader of the Protestant Association.