US History 1 Early Colonization to the Revolutionary War (1600-1775)
Colonists People from all walks of life. The early wave of colonists are funded privately. Most didn't survive long.
Indentured Servants People who wanted to cross the Atlantic but can't pay for themselves so they work as servants for 3 to 7 years in exchange for the voyage
Purtians A group of English Protestants who were prosecuted by the Church of England. They believed the church was too tolerant of Catholics.
Quakers Religion that started in England that believed that it was possible to know Christ even without church and clergymen. They were prosecuted and moved to the Americas.
Jamestown First permanent English settlement in North America in Virginia. Made up mostly of entrepreneurs and merchants looking for things to export back. John Rofle found tobacco that would flourish and made it a staple of the economy.
Pocahontas Native American that was captured in battle and taken to Jamestown where she eventually setlled and married John Rolfe. Relatively friendly and helped them survive.
Plymouth Colony Created by the religious outcast of Pilgrims, this was the second permanent English colony in the new World. Got along well with natives, was where Thanksgiving came out. relations deteriorated over time however.
King Philip Also known as Metacomet, was originally friendly with the Pilgrims at Plymouth but relations soured and he attacked in 1675 in King Philip's War, which lasted a year until King Philip was killed in 1676.
Metacomet Original name of King Philip
Bacon's Rebellion In 1676 Native Americans attacked a settlement in Virginia. People want Governor William Berkeley to punish them but he didn't. Nathaniel Bacon started an uprising which ended up with the burning of Jamestown. He died of dysentery. British troops later arrived to squash the rebellion.
1689 Boston Revolt England wanted to reform the colonies and they revoked the charter and sent a new governor that instated unpopular laws and forced the Church of England on them. The Puritans revolted and sent the governor back for trial. A new governor was instated and more religious tolerance was promised but the Puritans never got back the power to rule themselves.
Jacob Leisler German American merchant who lead a rebellion against the unpopular governor of New York after hearing about the Boston Revolt. England sent and army years later and restored authority in 1691 with a new governor. Leisler was executed for treason.
Virtual Representation The idea what the colonies were "virtual represented" by Parliament because Parliament represents the entirety of Great Britain. Needless to say, the colonists did not like that.
The Great Awakening Around 1740. Old religious views and ways were challenged by new ones. Ideas like people could do their own Bible study at home and still be involved or worshiping God through good works. Influenced by Deism.
Jonathon Edwards and George Whitefield Religious Leaders of the Great Awakening
Eliza Lucas Figured out how to grew indigo in the Americas with the help of slaves who knew the plant from Africa.
The French and Indian War 1754-1761. Border friction between the French and the British. Lasted 7 years in British victory and the signing of the Treaty of Paris. Put Britain in debt.
The Stamp Act 1765. Britain in debt so it taxed goods coming in and out of the colonies with this act. British thinks its justified because they protected the colonies while the colonies think it's too heavy and they have no representation to say otherwise.
Boston Tea Part People in Boston went on ships and dump tea into the harbor in protest
The Intolerable Acts 1774. Acts passed by King George III to punish the colonies for the Boston Tea Party. There were 5 acts total but 4 punishes Massachusetts and Boston in particular. It removed the right to govern, quarters and feed British soldiers, close down ports to all but British ships.
Age of Enlightenment A movement of intellectuals to advance knowledge and science. Started in Europe in the early 1600s and spread to America in the 1700s.
Benjamin Franklin Wrote the Silence Dogood letters, which argued for the US to revolt against Britain. Later known as America's First Statement for his work as an ambassador.
Thomas Paine Propagandist who wrote the pamphlet "Common Sense", which inspired people to rise up against Britain. Also played a major role in getting France to enter the Revolutionary War. Also believed the writing is the key to winning the war.
Republican Motherhood Republican Motherhood taught that mothers should do their best to instill the idea of republicanism to their children. This included ideas of sacrificing oneself for the greater good of all and protecting their freedoms. As a result of this movement, education for women increased.
Shakers Religious group that settled in New York in 1774. Mother Ann Lee was the leader of this group and was unique cause female leader. They attempted to make an Utopian society based on religious believe.
Mother Ann Lee Leader of the Shakers
First Continetal Congress Called in 1774 to discuss the recent passing of the Intolerable Acts. Split on the decision for independence, they decided instead to boycott goods and sent a letter to Britain, if nothing is done they will meet again and take further action.
Phyllis Wheatley African American poet who was emancipated from slavery where her mother died. Popular in both America and England. Thanked King George III when he repealed the Stamp Act. In 1775, wrote a poem dedicated to George Washington named "To His Excellency, George Washington"
To His Excellency, George Washington A poem by Phyllis Wheatley dedicated to George Washington. Written in 1775
James Otis In 1761 argued against the writs of assistance, which allowed British officials to ransack American homes.
Boston Massacre 1770, some Bostonian throw stuff at soldiers and got shot. Was a relatively minor incident.
Townshend Acts A series of laws passed by Britain in 1767 in order to raise money via taxes and raise compliance of the colonies.
Sugar Act Passed in 1764
Declaratory Act 1766, allows Parliament to legislate for the colonies in all cases what so ever.