Feb
MAR
Apr
10
2015
2016
2017
3 captures
10 Mar 16 - 9 Apr 16
Close Help
Stories From Ipswich
An antiquarian almanac from Ipswich, Massachusetts, America's best-preserved Puritan town
Menu
Skip to content
Stories from Ipswich
Every house has a story
Ipswich historic houses
First Period and Georgian houses
400 years of Ipswich architecture
Danvers old houses
Marblehead Colonial houses
Newburyport historic houses
People, events, legends & places
This day in Ipswich history
The Old North Burying Ground
Books
Ipswich in the Massachusetts Bay Colony
Publications of the Ipswich Historical Society
Old Ipswich families
Archives
Photographs & postcards
Ipswich photos
Postcards from Ipswich
Postcards from Newburyport
Postcards from Salem
Stories from the North Shore
Essex
Gloucester
Hamilton
Marblehead
Newburyport
Rockport
Rowley
Salem
Topsfield
A walking tour of historic Ipswich
Historic sites interactive map
Historic houses interactive map
Trails and rides
Visitor Center
Ipswich Historical Commission
Contact
Tough Guys of Ipswich
Gordon Harris / January 15, 2014
The next time you’re waiting in the seemingly interminable lines at the Ipswich Post Office, an interesting way to pass the time is by studying the large mural that covers the wall over the postmaster’s office door. The mural was painted in 1941 as part of the New Deal Public Works of Art Project by Saul Levine and depicts the town leaders of Ipswich gathered in opposition to a new tax imposed by the English crown. The act of opposition is also commemorated in the seal of the town of Ipswich , which bears the words, “The Birthplace of American Independence 1687”.
An emergency town meeting was called by John Andrews, chairman of the Ipswich selectmen to debate a new tax imposed by the crown-appointed governor Sir Edmund Andros. Rev. Wise, John Andrews, town clerk John Appleton, Samuel Appleton, William Goodhue, Robert Kinsman, and Thomas French were arrested, tried before the court in Boston, and imprisoned.
Ipswich muralist Alan Pearsall honored local “bad boy” and bail holdout Samuel Appleton with prominence in the right corner of the Ipswich Riverwalk Mural. Below him to the left are his brother John Appleton, Rev. John Wise and other Ipswich town leaders being arrested.
These were sturdy men who had built Ipswich, hardened veterans of  King Phillips War and the campaign against the French in Quebec. The king had just tossed out the rules and placed a bureaucrat named Sir Edmund Andros in charge of a new “Dominion of New England”.
The Reverend John Wise was outraged. A born rabble-rouser, he jumped on his horse and flew from Chebacco Parish to call on brothers Sam and John Appleton. Along with several other town leaders they planned their strategy and in a hurriedly-called meeting the next day convinced residents to stand firm against unjust taxation and the loss of local rule. The town had already voted unanimously on Feb 11, 1685 against the surrender of the charter, and at this meeting refused to appoint a tax collector. Andros sent soldiers to Ipswich, and Rev. Wise, John Andrews, John Appleton, Samuel Appleton, William Goodhue, Robert Kinsman, and Thomas French were arrested and hauled off to Boston.
The Ipswich Post Office Mural portrays these events.
At the sham trial our brave townsmen based their defense on the Magna Carta of England to which one of the judges asserted, “You must not think the laws of England follow us to the ends of the earth. Mr. Wise, you have no more privileges left you, than not to be sold as slaves.” They were imprisoned for several weeks, fined up to £50 each, and eventually released under £500 bond for each individual, quite a sum in that day. Sam Appleton refused to pay bond , scorned even the appearance of submission, made no petition for bail, and he refused to make any apology. He was kept a prisoner from November until March in an unheated dungeon.
Sir Edmund Andros is hauled to jail in Boston
News of the Ipswich resistance spread throughout the colony. On April 18, 1689 a group of provincial militia and citizens gathered in Boston and arrested several “Dominion” officials as well as several suspected sympathizers. Major Samuel Appleton helped escort Andros to Castle Island in Boston Harbor as a prisoner. Leaders of the former Massachusetts Bay Colony then reclaimed control of the government, rescinded the tax order, and Andros was shipped back to England, where at about the same time the Prince of Orange put down James II. It was a taste of things to come almost nine decades later in the Revolution of 1776.
Share this:
Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Google+ (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to email (Opens in new window)
Click to print (Opens in new window)
January 15, 2014 in Legends , People . Tags: Rev. John Wise , Samuel Appleton
Related posts
The defiant Samuel Appleton
The Ipswich Post Office mural
The Rev. John Wise of Ipswich
Post navigation
← Fall of the House of Searle
Questions of the Tribe →
Leave a Comment
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (Address never made public)
Name
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
Notify me of new posts via email.
Search this site
Search
Enter your address to receive new posts by email.
Join 362 other followers
Blog Topics
Blog Topics
Top Posts & Pages
Four-year-old Dorothy Good is jailed for witchcraft, March 24, 1692
Homes of the Lords
Who Were the Agawam Indians, Really?
Historic events
Stephen Coburn House, 16 North Main Street
Wrecks of the sand schooners
Legends
Leslie's Retreat, or how the Revolutionary War almost began in Salem, February 26, 1775
Bill George's nostalgic look at old Ipswich
Agawam House, 26 North Main Street
Winter is a good time to take care of your indoor carpentry projects and small repairs. Email Gordon Harris at gordonharris2@gmail.com . I'm offering a 10% labor discount for Ipswich area residents until spring.
Gordon Harris carpentry
A more beautiful fireplace
A deck lost, and rebuilt!
A room with a view
A lovely little mudroom
Finishing a basement
Replacing rotted woodwork with PVC trim and deckboards
A few decks
Restoring an old house
Repairing rotted sills with plastic body filler
The best storm door
Ipswich Historical Commission
Old North Burying Ground Preservation Plan
Protecting cultural landscapes
Ipswich Historical Commission presents Mary Conley Awards
Ipswich town historian Gordon Harris receives journalism award
Construction of the 1657 Alexander Knight house
Cleaning gravestones
Why Windows doesn’t know the word “thatcher”
The Fox Creek Canal
The Old Tann Fatts
Choate Bridge to be honored by the American Society of Civil Engineers on May 16
Ipswich: Images of America
The Essex County Greenbelt
A Guide to the Best Hikes, River Trips and Natural History of the Essex County Greenbelt Association
Newburyport books
Legendary Locals of Newburyport
Newburyport (MA) (Images of America)
Newburyport : Stories from the Waterside (Town Memoirs)
The Local News
Fixing What Isn’t Exactly Broken
Thursday is the First Day of the Rest of Process
Ipswich Man Tells How Seals Stink and Trash His Island
Ipswich chronicle
WHAT'S UP DOC? Trochlear nerve palsy
SENIOR Q&A: Situational depression versus something more
Voices of Hope
Ipswich River Watershed Association
TU NorEast Celebrates Wayne Castonguay at their Annual Banquet
Raise Your Paddle for Clean Water – Ipswich River Paddle-a-thon
Targeted Outreach Addresses Summer Water Waste
Make a Difference for the River!
North Reading Announces Plan to Stop Using River for Water Supply
anceSTORY Archives
Author Emerson "Tad" Baker Lecture Salisbury Public Library April 1 on book "A Storm of Witchcraft" and Salem Gallows Project
Mayflower Descendants A Breed Apart
The USS Newburyport 1919 L H Shattuck Shipyard Portsmouth NH
Nutfield Genealogy
Surname Saturday ~ BAKER of Ipswich, Massachusetts
Surname Saturday ~ WEBSTER of Ipswich, Massachusetts
Tombstone Tuesday ~ John Treadwell, died 1727, Ipswich, Massachusetts
Notes from Halibut Point
Granite Sloops
Granite Schooners
Winter Shoreline, Halibut Point
Streets of Salem
Hawthorne’s Homes and Haunts
Recovered
Salem Film Fest 2016
Mass Moments
James Reeb Dies in Alabama: March 10, 1965
Newbury Offers Wolf Bounty: March 9, 1704
Sophia Smith Endows New Women's College: March 8, 1870
New England Historical Society
Flashback Photos: The Great Boston Fire of 1872
The Musketaquid Comes Out of the Cellar
A Brief History of Town Meeting, From Election Cake to Lemon Meringue Pie
The Outsidah
Fixing What Isn’t Exactly Broken
“Coloring book with attitude” gets a home
This was fun!
Where’s the Outsidah?
Death by Christmas
New England Folklore
Ghost Stories and Lewiston Maine's Riverside Cemetery
Perry Boney, the Man Who Might Have Been A Fairy
Movie Review: The Witch, A New England-Folktale (2015)
Daily Dose
February 29, 1704: Deerfield is Attacked!
February 26, 1846: Frederick Douglass Visits Ireland
February 25, 1941: The Battle of Los Angeles
History Places
Gunston Hall, home of George Mason
Bethany Hawkins: My favorite history site
One of George Washington’s churches
Ipswich on Facebook
Historic Ipswich
I Love Ipswich
Ipswich, Essex and the North Shore
Ipswich Visitor Center
Historic Plum Island
The Photographic Society of the Parker River National Wildlife Refuge
Other North Shore towns
View posts on this site by town:
Andover
Boston
Danvers
Danvers historic houses
Essex
Gloucester
Hamilton
Lawrence
Lowell
Marblehead
Newbury
Newburyport
Newburyport historic houses
View a walking tour of Newburyport
Plum Island
Rockport
Rowley
Salem
Topsfield
Administration
Register
Log in
Entries RSS
Comments RSS
WordPress.com
  RSS - Posts
  RSS - Comments
About this site
Stories from Ipswich is produced by Ipswich town historian Gordon Harris. Contact Gordon  about creating or updating your website.
Ipswich Historical Commission
Stories from Ipswich
Memento Mori
Bike New England
Gordon Harris carpentry
Email  gordonharris2@gmail.com
Asus video card solves Windows 10 display problems
The affordable Asus HD 5450 video card resolved the distorted Windows 10 monitor display in my older computer.
©Gordon Harris 2015
Blog at WordPress.com. The Expound Theme .
Follow
Follow “Stories From Ipswich”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 362 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.