About What Jane Saw in 1796
An enterprising print-dealer, publisher, and alderman named John Boydell opened the first-ever Shakespeare museum in 1789. For a decade and a half, before closing in 1804, his popular "Shakspeare Gallery" showcased contemporary paintings (many were giant canvases with life-sized figures) of well-known scenes from Shakespeare's plays, commissioned from the likes of Reynolds, Romney, Fuseli, Northcote, Opie, Kauffman, Barry, West, and others. This website reconstructs the main interior of Boydell's Shakespeare Gallery as it looked in August of 1796, when novelist Jane Austen visited London.

If the architecture of Boydell's museum seems familiar, this is because his gallery occupied the building at number 52 Pall Mall that would afterwards house the British Institution—host to the 1813 Reynolds retrospective we reconstructed in 2013. Because most of Boydell's paintings, which were dispersed at auction in 1805, are now deemed lost, and the building itself was destroyed in 1870, a digital reconstruction is, once again, the only way to see what Jane Austen, our synecdotal avatar for thousands of eighteenth-century London sightseers, witnessed first hand.

I. What was The Shakespeare Gallery, and why did Boydell build it?

Boydell opened "The Shakspeare Gallery" (he preferred this archaic spelling but in view of the variations found even in eighteenth-century newspaper accounts we've opted for a consistently modern spelling) along up-and-coming Pall Mall on 4 May 1789. The gallery was the first of an ambitious three-part entrepreneurial plan to define Britishness with contemporary art. Boydell aimed to raise the status of history painters and engravers by yoking them to Shakespeare's rising star. The enterprising thespian David Garrick (1717-1779), supreme leader of the new Bardolatry, had made a career out of placing William Shakespeare at the center of British identity. John Boydell (1720-1804) similarly wished to foster a nationalist celebration of Shakespeare that might endorse his brand of art, namely contemporary engravings. The gallery was one of three interlocking projects: the second and third concerned an ambitious new edition of Shakespeare's plays and an elephant folio set of engravings of the gallery's paintings. The engravings would be available for separate purchase as handsome folio prints as well as illustrate the new edition in a smaller format.