Mar
APR
May
8
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
8 Apr 16 - 8 Apr 16
Close Help
HOME
BIOGRAPHY
ARCHIVE
BOOKS
BROADCAST
PUBLIC TALKS
PRIVATE EVENTS
LINKS
CONTACT
Read Andrew's Archive
By Publication:
Catalogue Essays
Feature Articles
Sunday Telegraph "In The Picture"
Sunday Telegraph Features
Sunday Telegraph Reviews 2004-2013
Talk
The Independent 1987 - 1999
Vogue Features 1989 - 2006
By Subject:
16th Century
17th Century
18th Century
19th Century
20th Century
Classical Antiquity
Middle Ages & Earlier
Now
Renaissance
Either type in a word or use the drop down options
History's broad canvas
Date: 04-06-1991
Owning Institution:
Publication: The Independent 1987 - 1999
Subject: 18th Century 19th Century
Andrew Graham-Dixon reports on an exhibition dedicated to a forgotten school of British history painting
Enter Friar Lawrence, stage left, bearing a torch.
What does he see?
Romeo, having dispatched Count Paris before poisoning himself, dead on the tomb of the Capulets; Juliet, bewildered and disoriented, in a state of shock.
James Boydell, who commissioned James Northcote's painting A Monument Belonging to the Capulets, Romeo and Paris Dead; Juliet and Friar Lawrence, must have been pleased.
This was perfect material for Boydell's ''Shakespeare Gallery'', which opened in Pall Mall in 1788.
Boydell was a printseller, not a philanthropist: he was happy to popularise the Bard, but the real point was to sell as many engraved reproductions of each picture as possible.
Northcote's painting was just the ticket for an audience raised on the swooning heroines of the eighteenth-century novel.
A Monument Belonging to the Capulets, etc is a painting of a kind rarely seen these days.
Museums tend to keep such works in store - although a few years ago the Tate Gallery did mount an exhibition of sub-ject pictures by Northcote's ambitious and unhappy contemporary, James Barry - and most commercial gal-leries have long since given up trying to create a market for them.
Most, but not all. ''
The Painted Word: Brit-ish History Painting 1750-1830'', at Heim, is a bold exhibition - it may not be easy, in a recession, to per-suade collectors that Northcote's 12-foot by 10 tearjerker is a bargain at pounds 40,000 - which attempts to rehabilitate a forgotten school of British narrative painting.
Northcote's painting and its kind are commonly regarded as freaks, as the eccentric by-products of a native tradition better suited to other, less declamatory genres: chiefly landscape and portraiture.
But landscape and portraiture were considered, well into the nineteenth century, to be essentially minor vehicles of expression.
History painting was the thing, if you had serious aspirations.
As Sir Joshua Reynolds put it in his Discourses on Art: ''No subject can be proper that is not generally interesting.
It ought to be either some eminent instance of heroic action, or heroic suffering.''
The trouble was that British history painters did their own share of heroic suffering.
Reynolds' prescrip-tions were chiefly derived from Italian and French painting, but the structures of patronage that had sustained narrative artists on the continent did not exist in this country.
There was no Catholic church and, therefore, no significant tradition of religious painting (this also meant that there was no studio system for the training of history painters in Britain).
There was no tradition of civic competition, nothing like the spirit of campanilismo which benefitted the artists of Florence and Siena.
Initiatives like the ''Shakespeare Gallery'', which provided Northcote with the opportunity to paint his few large- scale works, were rare and generally unsuccessful: Boydell's project almost bankrupted him.
Private collectors in Britain might occasionally purchase major narrative works, but these tended to be Old Masters.
Why commission a painting from Northcote, when you could purchase a Titian?
British artists were the peo-ple you turned to for your portrait, for a picture of your dog or your racehorse or your country estate.
When Reynolds advised the students of the Royal Academy Schools to pursue history painting he was effectively counselling professional suicide.
There was the occasional exception: Benjamin West, the history painter who succeeded Reynolds as President of the RA, was lucky enough to gain the favour of George III, under whose patronage he decorated the Royal Chapel at Windsor.
His early The Return of the Prodigal Son is a soberly painted scene of reconciliation, set within a classical portico, which demonstrates the sort of flaccid piety that went down particularly well at Windsor.
George III, who was already beginning to go insane when West first impressed him, seems to have found such works mentally soothing; he is known to have detested West's later, more vigorous neo-baroque manner.
West apart, the story of British history painting during the Georgian period is a tale of almost unrelieved frustration.
It might be said to begin with James Barry, who died in abject poverty in 1806, suffering from the paranoid delusion that members of the Royal Academy were plotting to murder him, and to end with Benjamin Robert Haydon, who finally took his own life in 1839 after years of disappointment and penury.
History painters developed into a strange sub- cult within the world of British art in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries: a gang of brooding malcontents, whose predicament exposed a peculiar gap between the theory of art and the possibilities available to artists at that time.
Reynolds was frequently badmouthed by some of the more vocally unhappy British history painters of the time.
They thought he was a hypocrite, and they had a point: he preached the virtues of history painting but made a fortune by painting portraits.
Yet Reynolds' portraits often demonstrate that he was, himself, aware of the inconsistency.
His Portrait of Annabella, Mrs Blake as Juno Receiving the Cestus from Venus is strange in the way that many Reynolds portraits are strange, because it is so clearly meant to be more than a portrait.
It is a peculiar blend of portrait and narrative, of mythological and modern day subject matter, which results in a form of masquerade.
Reynolds' portrait is a sublimated history painting which, in the end, reads as a debased history painting: when he kits out the willowy, aristocratic Mrs Blake as Juno he is using the elevated iconography of narrative painting as, in effect, a form of fancy dress.
British history painters tended to blame their lack of success on a lack of patronage, but that is only part of the story.
The tradition that they were attempting to extend was already, by the later eighteenth century, showing signs of exhaustion.
The advent of Romanticism coincided with a collapse of confidence in the power of public, declamatory art.
In Romantic literature, this meant the decline of epic verse and the rise of the lyric poem; in Romantic art, it meant the decline of history painting and the rise of landscape.
The relatively few British history paintings that have survived from the Romantic period are failures, but the ways in which they fail can be extremely interesting.
Henry Fuseli was a Swiss-born history painter whose ''Milton Gallery'' - an exhibition of large paintings based for the most part on Paradise Lost - turned out to be a resounding flop when opened to the public in London in 1799.
He is in many ways the most intriguing of all the unsuccessful British narrative artists of his time, because he is unsuccessful in such an extravagantly Romantic fashion.
Like his contemporaries, he set out to depict events in which, as Reynolds put it, ''men are universally concerned''; the history painting was meant, among other things, to inculcate universal moral standards.
Instead, he painted pictures that were weird and fantastical, bizarre reflections of a truant imagination.
Fuseli is represented in the Heim exhibition by two drawings which are, albeit in sketch form, entirely characteristic of his approach to large narrative works.
Writhing bodies sprawl and stretch, as if attempting to leap the confines of the picture, barely located in a disconcerting and ambiguous space.
Fuseli's subjects - in this instance Kriemhild and the Dead Siegfried and Orestes Following the Murder of Clytemnestra - are irrelevant because they are merely alibis for the exercise of a violent and morbid fantasy.
Scenes of murder and torture are commonplace in Fuseli, but they serve no moral purpose.
He was not a great painter, but he has a certain importance.
The tradition of history painting was in crisis by the early nineteenth century, and Fuseli's art - more clearly than Northcote's or West's - reveals the nature of that crisis.
The lesson of Fuseli's art is that the Romantic imagination was too mobile, too volatile to be contained within the older forms of narrative art.
Creative Commons License | Rights information | Website by Imagefile.co.uk
AndrewGrahamDixon.com is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution - Noncommercial - Share Alike 2.0 UK: England & Wales License.