BookPublisher: 2012Description: v.p.Subject(s): Hewett, Edgar L.  (Edgar Lee), 1865-1946 | Chaco Canyon (N.M.) | New Mexico -- Antiquities
Contents:
Edgar Lee Hewett's early work in Chaco Canon: a prologue to the Chaco Field Schools.
-- The Wesley Bradfield photographic record of excavations at Chetro Ketl 1920-21.
-- Notes on the excavation of Kiva 11 (Kiva F) at Chetro Ketl in 1920 and the disposition of artifacts by K.M. Chapman.
-- List of photographs probably taken by Wesley Bradfield in Chaco Canyon in 1920 and 1921.
Summary: "Based on our research into E.L. Hewett and the field schools he conducted in Chaco Canyon, we examined data from a number of repositories with the goal of reconstructing a history of the work conducted during the 1929-1935 years when Hewett was the director of the combined University of New Mexico/Museum of New Mexico/ School of American Research, as well as during the two years (1936 and 1937) when the School of American Research supported student projects in the canyon that were separate from the University of New Mexico field schools.
As we delved into the records, we realized that we needed a better understanding of what Hewett knew about the canyon and when he knew it.
We consider this a prologue to his involvement with the University of New Mexico and its formal program of student instruction through the field school experience.
By 1929 Hewett was considered an educator in southwestern archaeology and anthropology and a strong supporter of site preservation.
By then he had led an expedition to Chaco in 1902, but bery little was known about it.
Additionally, he spent two seasons excavating at Chetro Ketl and published overviews of this work in Art and Archaeology.
Unfortunately no field notes from either of these two expeditions were known to exist.
By examining Hewett's published reports, as well as those of his associateds, plus several autobiographies or diaries, and other available records, we were able to provide an outline of Hewett's earl ventures in Chaco archaeology.
The attached manuscript will provide the basis for our introductory chapter to the Chaco field schools."