Richard Wetherill - Chaco Canyon

Chaco Canyon

The ruins of Chaco Canyon have been known to the outside world since the 1850s, when a military survey project passed through the area. The location was so remote, however, that formal archaeological work did not began until 1896, when a party from the American Museum of Natural History began excavating in Pueblo Bonito. This "Hyde Exploring Expedition" spent five years in the region, sending collections back to New York and even operating a series of trading posts.

In 1901, Wetherill, who had worked for the Hyde family in Chaco Canyon, homesteaded land that included Pueblo Bonito, Pueblo Del Arroyo, and Chetro Ketl. While investigating Wetherill's land claim, General Land Office special agent S. J. Holsinger made a report which strongly recommended the creation of a national park to preserve Chacoan sites. President Theodore Roosevelt proclaimed "Chaco Canyon National Monument" on March 11, 1907, as Wetherill relinquished his claim on several parcels of land he held in Chaco Canyon.

Read more about this topic:  Richard Wetherill

Other articles related to "chaco canyon, canyon":

Timeline Of Chacoan History - 20th Century
... park to preserve archaeological sites in Chaco Canyon 1907 Chaco Canyon National Monument is established ... participates in a National Geographic Society research project exploring Chaco Canyon ... specimens to date habitation of Chaco Canyon 1937 A Civilian Conservation Corps of Navajo stonemasons repairs Chacoan buildings in Chaco Canyon ...
Chaco Culture National Historical Park - History - Excavation and Protection
... The first documented trip through Chaco Canyon was an 1823 expedition led by New Mexican governor José Antonio Vizcarra ... He noted several large ruins in the canyon ... The trader Josiah Gregg wrote about the ruins of Chaco Canyon, referring in 1832 to Pueblo Bonito as "built of fine-grit sandstone" ...
Colorado River - Human History - Indigenous Peoples
... the basin of the San Juan River, with the center of their civilization in northern New Mexico's Chaco Canyon ... In Chaco Canyon and the surrounding lands, they built more than 150 multi-story pueblos or "great houses", the largest of which, Pueblo Bonito, is composed of more than six hundred rooms ... large populations at their height, with the Chaco Canyon Puebloans numbering between 6,000–15,000 and estimates for the Hohokam ranging between 30,000–200,000 ...

Famous quotes containing the word canyon:

“In a world that holds books and babies and canyon trails, why should one condemn oneself to live day-in, day-out with people one does not like, and sell oneself to chaperone and correct them?”
Ruth Benedict (1887–1948)