APR
JUN
JUL
11
2015
2016
2017
37 captures
15 Apr 12 - 9 Oct 16
Close Help
Skip to navigation
Skip to content
Skip to sidebar
Chaco Research Archive
About
Bibliography
Contact
Help
Go
Explore the Canyon
Query the Database
Chaco Sites
Architectural Stabilization
Image Gallery
Chaco Resources
Bibliography
Digital Monographs
Popular Data Sets
Related Links
Timeline
Tree-Ring Databases
User Guide
Chaco Sites
Pueblo Bonito
Using this Map:
Click on the map image to launch full-size, interactive map.
When you select an individual room or kiva context on the larger map, a pop-up window will appear displaying information categories from our database available for that context (Artifacts, Burials, Tree-Ring Dates, and Features).
Each of the categories can be expanded by clicking the ‘+’ to reveal an abridged list of basic information.
Selecting the category heading itself will open a separate window with complete details.
How it Works Interactive Map
Site Description
Pueblo Bonito (Spanish for “beautiful town”) is the best known of all Chacoan great houses.
Located near the center of a cluster of great and small houses sometimes referred to as “Downtown Chaco,” the surrounding great houses include Chetro Ketl to the east, Pueblo del Arroyo to the west, Kin Kletso to the northwest, Kin Sabe to the southwest, and Casa Rinconada to the south.
Bonito is also about 0.6 miles (1.0 km.)
south of Pueblo Alto and New Alto.
Although the footprint of Pueblo Bonito is slightly smaller in area than Chetro Ketl, this D-shaped great house is the biggest of all Chacoan great houses with 32 kivas, 3 great kivas, and over 350 ground-floor rooms.
Two large refuse mounds lie just south of the pueblo.
Pueblo Bonito rose four stories along its north arc of rooms while rooms facing the plaza were primarily single-story.
Intervening room rows were two- and three-stories tall, creating a roof terrace that rose in height from the plaza to the back rooms.
The plaza was closed on the south side by a row of rooms, and two partially-walled refuse mounds lay just outside the plaza enclosure.
At least one Chacoan road approaches the building from the north, and there is good evidence for a road linking Pueblo Bonito with Casa Rinconada, the isolated great kiva on the opposite side of the canyon (Vivian and Hilpert 2002).
Pueblo Bonito has been the object of two major excavation programs.
The Hyde Exploring Expedition, sponsored by the American Museum of Natural History and directed by George Pepper and Richard Wetherill, excavated portions of Pueblo Bonito between 1986 and 1900, uncovering approximately 189 masonry rooms and several kivas.
Neil Judd then conducted work in other parts of the building for the National Geographic Society from 1921 to 1927.
Drs. Patricia Crown and Wirt Wills recently re-examined the Bonito mounds as part of the Chaco Stratigraphy Project.
Alternative site designations include 29SJ387, LA 226, and Bc 253.
Excavation History
1896-1900: The Hyde Exploring Expedition, sponsored by the American Museum of Natural History, excavated about 189 rooms and several kiva under the direction of George H. Pepper and Richard Wetherill.
1897: Warren K. Moorehead of the Philips Andover Academy excavated rooms 53 and 56 and perhaps a few other areas of the pueblo.
1916: Nels Nelson and Earl Morris placed stratigraphic tests in the east and west refuse mounds.
1920-1927: Neil M. Judd excavated most ground floor rooms not uncovered by the Hyde Expedition, trenched the refuse mounds and the west plaza, and identified wall foundations outside (particularly east) of the main great house.
2005-Present:  Dr. Patricia Crown and Dr. Wirt Wills re-excavated Neil Judd's trenches through the refuse mounds to investigate mound stratigraphy, assess evidence for water-control features, and analyze the recovered artifact assemblage.
Size and Dates
More than 350 ground floor rooms, 32 kivas, and three great kivas
Inhabited from the mid-A.D. 850s until at least the early-12th century, with some reoccupation in the late-12th century
Site-Level Data
List Tree-ring Dates (1478 items)
List Artifacts (15,206 items)
View Images (4038 items)
List Archival Documents (547 items)
Go to Architectural Stabilization Records
Site and Room Data
Aztec West Ruins
Bc 50 - Tseh So
Bc 51
Bc 53 - Roberts' Site
Bc 57
Bc 58
Bc 59
Chetro Ketl
Pueblo Bonito
Pueblo del Arroyo
Shabik'eshchee
Talus Unit #1
Site Data Only
Bc 52 - Casa Sombreada
Bc 54 - Corn Mother Site
Bc 55
Bc 56
Casa Chiquita
Casa Rinconada
Hungo Pavi
Kin Bineola
Kin Kletso
Kin Klizhin
Kin Nahasbas
Kin Sabe
Leyit Kin
Lizard House
New Alto
Peñasco Blanco
Pueblo Alto
Pueblo Pintado
Tsin Kletsin
Una Vida
Wijiji
© 2010 Chaco Research Archive.
Published by the Institute for Advanced Technology in the Humanities and the Department of Anthropology, University of Virginia
Loading data...