May
JUN
Jul
5
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
5 Jun 16 - 5 Jun 16
Close Help
We cannot verify your location (Log In)
About
Contact
Help
Tools
Order
Saved Citations (0)
for Librarians
for Publishers
Advanced Search
OR
Browse > Social Sciences
View Citation
Save Citation
The Architecture of Chaco Canyon, New Mexico
Lekson, Stephen H
Publication Year: 2007
The structures of Chaco Canyon, built by native peoples between AD 850 and 1130, are among the most compelling ancient monuments on earth.
Recognized as a World Heritage Site, these magnificent ruins are consistently featured in scholarly books and popular media.
Yet, like Chaco itself, these buildings are anomalous in Southwestern archaeology and much debated.
In a century of study, our understanding and means of approaching these ruins have grown considerably.
Important tree-ring dating, GIS research, and computer imaging point to the need for a new volume on Chaco architecture that unifies older information with the new.
The chapters in this volume focus on Chaco Great Houses and consider three overlapping themes: studies of technology and building types, analyses of architectural change, and readings of the built environment.
To aid reconsideration there are over 150 maps, floor plans, elevations, and photos, including a number of color illustrations.
Published by: University of Utah Press
Contents
Search Inside This Book
Book Details
Cover
Download PDF
Title Page, Copyright Page
Download PDF
Contents
Download PDF
pp.
v-vi
List of Illustrations
Download PDF
pp.
vii-x
List of Tables
Download PDF
pp.
xi-xii
1.
Introduction
Stephen H. Lekson
Download PDF
pp. 1-6
Chaco Canyon was the center of the Pueblo Southwest during the eleventh and early twelfth centuries ad.
Today it is a National Historic Park.
Its ancient buildings evoke a remarkable range of responses from Pueblo and other Native peoples; from architects and artists and poets; ...
2.
Great House Form
Stephen H. Lekson
Download PDF
pp. 7-44
This chapter presents a revised version of an essay on “form” in Great Pueblo Architecture (Lekson 1984a: Chapter 3) as well as new material summarizing facts about great house form (Figure 2.1).
The basic data on form, room sizes, ground plans, etc., have not changed much since 1984 (Figures 2.2 and 2.3), ...
3.
Gearing Up and Piling On: Early Great Houses in the Interior San Juan Basin
Thomas C.Windes
Download PDF
pp. 45-92
The northern, western and southwestern peripheries of the geological San Juan Basin enjoyed extensive, persistent Puebloan occupation from Basketmaker II through Pueblo III times.
Conversely, the interior of the basin (Figure 3.1), which is drained by the Chaco River, had its population peaks but generally was sparsely inhabited for much of the Puebloan era.
...
4.
Great Kivas in Time, Space, and Society
Ruth M. Van Dyke
Download PDF
pp. 93-126
Few architectural forms have so captivated the public imagination as the great kiva.
The circular masonry “great bowls” in front of Pueblo Bonito and Chetro Ketl attracted the attention of early canyon excavators, such as Judd and Hewett.
...
5.
Architectural Studies of Pueblo Bonito: The Past, the Present, and the Future
Jill E. Neitzel
Download PDF
pp. 127-154
As the largest of the numerous ruins in Chaco Canyon, Pueblo Bonito drew the attention of the first archaeologists who visited the area in the latter part of the nineteenth century.
With its multi-story walls of fine masonry and its extensive rubble mound, Pueblo Bonito appeared to be a stunning architectural achievement in this remote and desolate canyon (Figure 5.1).
...
6.
The Changing Faces of Chetro Ketl
Stephen H. Lekson, Thomas C.Windes, Patricia Fournier
Download PDF
pp. 155-178
Chetro Ketl was either the largest or the second largest building in Chaco, after Pueblo Bonito.
Some archaeologists thought Bonito bigger; others favored Chetro Ketl.
Its construction (990 to 1115) began almost a century later than Pueblo Bonito’s, but Chetro Ketl soon rivaled its older neighbor as the architectural focus of “downtown” Chaco.
...
7.
Building Social History at Pueblo Bonito: Footnotes to a Biography of Place
Wendy Ashmore
Download PDF
pp. 179-198
The most extensviely excavated and intensively studied construction complex in the core of Chaco Canyon, Pueblo Bonito has yielded an intricate record of architectural growth and modification.
Planning and conscious design are frequently inferred, embodied in multiple construction stages.
...
8.
Revisiting Downtown Chaco
John Stein, Richard Friedman, Taft Blackhorse, Richard Loose
Download PDF
pp. 199-224
In this chapter we construct a digital three-dimensional model of “downtown” Chaco Canyon as it may have appeared at 1130, the approximate date that great house construction ceased.1 Our reconstructions are based on empirical evidence gathered from detailed field surveys, photogrammetric analysis, and remote sensing analysis.
...
9.
The Primary Architecture of the Chacoan Culture:A Cosmological Expression
Anna Sofaer
Download PDF
pp. 225-254
Studies by the solstice project indicate that the major buildings of the ancient Chacoan culture of New Mexico contain solar and lunar cosmology in three separate articulations: their orientations, internal geometry, and geographic interrelationships were developed in relationship to the cycles of the sun and moon.
...
Contributors
Download PDF
pp. 255-256
Index
Download PDF
pp. 257-264
Image Plates
Download PDF
E-ISBN-13: 9781607817895
E-ISBN-10: 1607817896
Print-ISBN-13: 9780874808469
Print-ISBN-10: 0874808464
Page Count: 280
Illustrations: 106 illus., 20 color plates, 12 tables
Publication Year: 2007
Edition: 1st
Research Areas
Social Sciences
Social Sciences > Archaeology
Recommend
Email a link to this page
Frequently Downloaded
Subject Headings
Chaco Culture National Historical Park (N.M.) -- Congresses.
Chaco culture -- New Mexico -- Chaco Canyon -- Congresses.
Chaco architecture -- New Mexico -- Chaco Canyon -- Congresses.
Chaco Canyon (N.M.) -- Antiquities -- Congresses.
Related Content
Knowledge in Motion: Constellations of Learning Across Time and Place
A Universal Theory of Pottery Production: Irving Rouse, Attributes, Modes, and Ethnography
New Deal Archaeology in Tennessee: Intellectual, Methodological, and Theoretical Contributions
You have access to this content
Free sample
Open Access
Restricted Access
Welcome to Project MUSE
Use the simple Search box at the top of the page or the Advanced Search linked from the top of the page to find book and journal content.
Refine results with the filtering options on the left side of the Advanced Search page or on your search results page.
Click the Browse box to see a selection of books and journals by: Research Area, Titles A-Z, Publisher, Books only, or Journals only.
Connect with Project MUSE
Join our Facebook Page
Follow us on Twitter
Project MUSE | 2715 North Charles Street | Baltimore, Maryland USA 21218 | (410) 516-6989 | About | Contact | Help | Tools | Order
©2016 Project MUSE.
Produced by The Johns Hopkins University Press in collaboration with The Milton S. Eisenhower Library.