Expedition Principal Investigator
Lighthouse Archaeological Maritime Program
Jean Ribault’s fleet consisted of  seven ships, three of which were smaller than 100 tons and four of which were  greater. The smaller ships included La Perle (“Pearl”), commanded by Ribault’s son Jacques, and La Levrière (“Greyhound”), which Laudonnière  commanded on the final voyage home. One of these two ships was 80 tons  and the other 70 tons. The smallest ship, L’Épaule  de Mouton (“Leg of Mutton”), measured 60 tons.
Ribault successfully  unloaded all or most of the supplies from these ships at Fort Caroline , and  they remained at the Fort during Ribault’s attack , so were not wrecked by the  September storm. L’Épaule  de Mouton appears to have been scuttled at the mouth of the River May after  the fall of Fort Caroline, while the other two made it successfully back to  Europe.
 
La Trinité
A  16th-century English galleass, the Antelope. One of King Henry VIII’s ships, it  is pictured here on the Anthony Roll, an illustrated record of ships in the  Tudor Navy, 1546. It may have looked similar to the Trinité, Ribault’s galleass. Note the oar ports positioned below  the gun ports. Click image for credit and larger view.
It was Ribault’s four larger ships  that were wrecked probably between Ponce Inlet and Cape Canaveral, and thus are  of interest to expedition archaeologists. First was Ribault’s 32-gun flagship, La Trinité, owned by the crown. It was a galleass, a hybrid galleon-type  warship propelled by both oars and sail, and a relatively small one at around  150-160 tons. It does not appear that La  Trinité was  unloaded before the storm, which makes it a particularly promising target for  an archaeological survey, both due to the presence of iron detectable by  magnetometry and the wealth of potentially preserved material culture.
A  significant amount of munitions, armament, and supplies are listed on its 28  April 1565 manifest. Iron objects which are likely preserved include 20 berches (large faucons or falcons, a class of cannon); four chiens (another artillery class); 977 cannon balls; 300 iron pikes;  1,300 nails; 100 corsets of armor; 3,153 pounds of stock iron; two anvils; a  large iron bowl; a sheet of iron; and a variety of small items including tongs,  hooks, pincers, and other hand tools.
Some of the ship’s bronze cannon were  salvaged by surviving crewmembers, but there is no other record of significant  salvage activities taking place.
La  Trinité was stranded on a sandbar for some time before succumbing to the  waves, suggesting that the shipwreck may be preserved in a more intact  condition than the other three, which broke to pieces in the surf soon after  running aground.
 
L’Émérillon, La Truite and L’Émérillon (2)
French colonization vessels from Laudonnière’s 1564 expedition, as depicted by  Theodore de Bry engravings, after artwork by Jacques Le Moyne, who was with  Laudonnière. Click image for credit and larger view.
The vice-flagship was the 29-gun L’Émérillon (“Little Falcon”), also registering 150-160 tons. She  was owned by the King and built as a roberge,  a type of ship that is not fully understood.
L’Émérillon had a sizable cargo, according to her 28 April 1565  manifest. Iron hardware on board included 18 cannon; seven “iron carriages” for  bronze guns (it is likely this indicates the wheels and axles were iron); 380  cannon balls; 32 iron picks; and other hardware and tools including hooks,  hammers, pincers, and artillery wedges.
La Truite (“Trout”) is another ship of  similar tonnage, between 150 and 160, possibly another roberge. As her manifest has not been located, her armament and  cargo remains unknown, though they were probably similar in scope and nature to  the ships above.
The fourth ship was also named L’Émérillon, and is usually designated by scholars as L’Émérillon (2) to distinguish it from  the first vessel. L’Émérillon (2) is  the smallest of the four lost ships, at 120 tons. She was privately owned and  contracted by the crown, and is believed by some scholars to be another roberge. Her cargo and armament remains  somewhat of a mystery, as her full manifest is not extant and the surviving  receipt signed by her captain Vincent Collas lists only 48 cannon balls and 56  pounds of gunpowder.
These last three shipwrecks  were reported to have been driven aground and subsequently broken to pieces by  the crashing surf with the loss of many lives. This suggests that their remains  are likely more scattered than the wreck of La  Trinité. It can be speculated that there was less of an opportunity to  salvage these wrecks, as they would have disappeared beneath the waves  relatively quickly and, even with a significant scatter of flotsam on the  beach, been difficult to locate.
 