March On Birmingham
kirstennewman
By Tim Hutchings
The 1963 Birmingham movement was a movement organized in the early 1963 by the SCLC (Southern Christian Leadership Conference) to bring attention to the integration efforts of African Americans in Birmingham, Alabama.
The movement was led by James Bevel, Fred Shuttlesworth, Martin Luther King and others.
The nonviolent March widely publicized confrontations between young black students and white civic authorities.
Televsion cameras allowed the whole country to see the brutality of the police.
In 1960 Birmingham was probably the most segregated city in the US.
Although the population was nearly 350000, 40% of them were black, but there were no black police officers, firefighters, sales clerks in department stores, bus drivers or bank tellers.
The only jobs that black could have involved manual labor in steel mills, work in household service, yard maintenance or working black neighborhoods.
Black secretaries could not work for white professionals and workers had to be laid off, the black people were the first to go.
Only 10% of the black population were registered to vote.
Lower pay at the steel mills were common for the black people and racial segregation throughout Jefferson county was legally required on all aspects of life.
Between 1945 and 1962 Birmingham got a nickname Bombingham.
The neighborhood that shared black and white families was called dynamite hill.
On May 8, 1963 at 4:00 pm white business leaders agreed to most of the protesters demands.
The rift between businessmen and politicians became clear when they couldn’t guarantee the release of the protesters from jail.
On May 10, Fred Shuttlesworth and Martin Luther King told reporters they had an agreement from the city of Birmingham to desegregate lunch counters, restrooms, drinking fountains and fitting rooms within 90 days, and to hire blacks in stores as salesmen and clerks.
Urged by John F. Kennedy the united auto workers, national maritime workers, united steelworkers union and the American Federation of Labor and the Congress of Industrial Organizations raised $237000 in bail money to free the demonstrators from jail.
On the night of May 1,  a bomb heavily damaged the gaston motel where Martin Luther King staying.
Which he had left hours before, but another bomb had damaged the house of A.D. King (Martin’s brother).
When the police went to investigate they were met with rocks and bottles from the neighborhood blacks.
The arrival of state troopers only turned the situation into a riot, numerous vehicles and house were burned and several people were stabbed including a single police officer.
By May 13 3000 federal troops were deployed in Birmingham to restore the order.
After the campaign desegregation slowly took place after the demonstrations.
By July most of segregation ordinances had been overturned.
Some of the department stores complied with the new rules.
City parks and golf courses opened again and allowed black and white citizens.
The Birmingham campaign inspired the Civil Rights Movement in other parts of the South.
Two days after King and Shuttlesworth announced the settlement in Birmingham, Medgar Evers of the NAACP in Jackson, Mississippi  demanded a biracial committee to address concerns there.
On June 12 1963 Evers was fatally shot outside of his home.