Life of late civil rights leader Newstell Marable Sr. parallels movement’s history
John Strickler - The Mercury Millicent Marable talks on a lifetime of working along side her late husband Newstell Marable on civil rights for African Americans.
By Evan Brandt, The Mercury
Millicent Marable talks about a lifetime of working for equality alongside her late husband Newstell Marable.
John Strickler — The Mercury
The fight for equality during the Civil Rights era grabbed national headlines in places like Mississippi, Washington, D.C., and Birmingham and Selma, Alabama.
But that same struggle was taking place in a hundred smaller places across the country in a hundred smaller ways that were just as important to the locals fighting them as the national struggle was.
That was as true in Pottstown as anywhere.
And around here, more often than not, you would find Newstell Marable Sr. in the middle of every fight for equality.
Marable, president of the Pottstown branch of the NAACP for more than 30 years, died Jan. 21 at his home on Old Douglass Drive in Douglass Township, Berks County.
Friday marked the 50th anniversary of the day Newstell Marable and his wife of 60 years, Millicent (Corum) Marable, moved into that house.
And it was in that house — significant because the couple built it after they were blocked by Realtors from homes in Pottstown and Stowe — that she spent some time recently, reflecting on the couple’s lives together and their lifelong struggle for equality.
Millicent Marable, surrounded by boxes of newspaper clippings and photographs of her husband’s many public efforts to oppose discrimination, said there is almost too much to remember.
Red-lining real estate
Ironically, one of the young couple’s first shared experiences with discrimination in the Pottstown area was 60 years ago when they were first married and trying to buy a home.
“The Realtors would only show you homes in a certain part of town, on Lincoln or Chestnut or down on Water Street” which is now called Industrial Highway, Millicent recalled.
“Whenever we tried to look at another house, we would get there and we’d be told ‘it was just sold this morning,’ but then you would see the ‘For Sale’ sign out a week later,” she said.
Millicent Corum grew up on Beech Street and knew Newstell’s mother before she met her future husband.
Newstell was born and raised in Alabama and came to Pottstown after serving in the Army.
“Newstell’s mom lived on Vine Street in a row home at one end, and we tried to buy one at the other end, but the people wouldn’t sell to us,” Millicent recalled.
“I never saw Newstell so mad.
He told me ‘we’re going to build our own house,’ and that’s just what we did.”
In some ways, it could be said that Marable approached his lifelong fight against discrimination the same way – if he couldn’t change people’s minds, he would try to change the situation.
And often enough, he would create a situation that changed people’s minds.
Fighting racism in Boyertown
During the height of the 1960s civil rights movement, Marable frequently went to speak in the Boyertown area, where the Ku Klux Klan was active.
“The first time we went up there for Newstell to speak, I think it was the Odd Fellows Hall, and those people were crazy,” Millicent recalled.
“They couldn’t understand how Newstell could have a suit to wear, they thought Dr. King was a communist,” she said.
“We had to go out the back door and hide out in a minister’s house for a few hours before we could go back and get our car.”
“Newstell knew that sometimes you had to stand up for what’s right, and sometimes you had to run for what’s right,” Jon Corson, vice president of the Pottstown chapter of the NAACP, joked during Marable’s memorial service Feb. 7, while recalling another Boyertown occasion when a back-door exit was required.
“But he would always go back.
He never gave up,” said Corson.
During the Feb. 7 service, Marable’s grandson and namesake recalled another tale from those days that was symbolic of how his grandfather approached human relations.
“Pop told me about a time he was up in Boyertown speaking and there was a Klan member there in his hood.
Pop told me how he went up and shook the man’s hand and started playing with his little daughter,” Newstell Marable III recalled.
“I said ‘were you crazy?’
and he looked at me and said ‘never be afraid of a man who breathes the same air as you’.”
Years later, with the help of the school district, Boyertown was named No Place for Hate.
But as Marable would say, you can’t rest on your laurels.
“He thought rest was for other people,” the Rev. LeRoy Burger, assistant pastor at Bethel AME Church, said during the Feb. 7 service.
As recently as 10 years ago, hate groups like the Ku Klux Klan and National Alliance were again active in the Boyertown area – and so were efforts to counteract them.
There was an attempted cross-burning on the lawn of an African-American family in Gilbertsville in 2004.
Two years earlier, robed Ku Klux Klan members were handing out literature at the corner of Reading and Philadelphia avenues in downtown Boyertown.
This resulted in “Project Lemonade,” which used the Klan appearance to “make lemonade out of lemons” and raise money for the Southern Poverty Law Center.
A decade earlier, Marable had used a similar tactic.
It was 1995 when the Klan obtained a permit to speak on the steps of Pottstown Borough Hall, which was on King Street at the time.
Marable helped offset their activities by organizing a counter-rally on the steps of the library a few blocks away.
A long history
Marable’s efforts for equality spanned decades in the tri-county region.
In 1961, Marable was arrested when he joined protests over Phoenixville High School’s refusal to allow African-Americans to be cheerleaders.
He also objected when the Pottstown High School Band went to Washington, D.C. to compete and the white students had to stay in one hotel and the black students in another, Millicent recalled.
In 1966, Marable organized a group to protest the exclusion of African-Americans from membership at Sunnybrook Pool, a private pool club.
“We had help from Fellowship Farm and our youth council and members (of the NAACP),” Millicent recalled.
“We marched all summer long, every Saturday and Sunday, because people had to work.
It was mild, no one got violent or anything, but they turned the fire hose on us a couple times.
I think they thought we would run away, but we didn’t mind because we were so hot already.
We just kept marching,” she said.
Pool policy did not change that summer, but it was those protests, she said, which helped convince local industrialist Edward Gruber, the CEO of the Spring City Knitting Co., to donate the money for a public pool in Pottstown’s Memorial Park.
“Mr. Gruber liked Newstell and he called up and said ‘you’ll get a pool,’” she said.
“And he would also look to Newstell for people he wanted to hire.
He would call and say he needed a driver and Newstell would find him a responsible person who was looking for a job.”
In later years, Marable would spend many hours in front of Pottstown Borough Council trying to get a new place for First Ward children to swim after the borough closed Gruber Pool due to poor maintenance.
Time in jail
Marable talked about her husband being arrested when he was fighting for the rights of two African-Americans, who were junior firefighters with the West End Fire Company in Stowe but were not allowed to become full-fledged firefighters.
“That was back in the ’70s and we were boycotting the social room, something happened and Newstell got arrested, but Judge (Charles) Dasch threw it out and they let him go,” she said.
She recounted similar efforts at North End Fire Company, ironic when one considers the paucity of volunteers now plaguing fire companies.
Boycotts and protests also included Acme Markets, a High Street social club associated with workers at the former Doehler-Jarvis plant, the Jaycees, and other social clubs that barred African-Americans.
The March on Washington
Marable stood alongside the civil rights giants of the period.
He grew up less than a mile from Frederick Lee Shuttlesworth, the noted civil rights leader and Alabama minister who was co-founder of Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
Shuttlesworth was instrumental in the 1963 “Birmingham campaign” that led to the city changing its discrimination laws.
“They knew each other quite well,” said Millicent.
That year, 1963, was also the year of the historic March on Washington at which the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his famous “I have a dream” speech and the Marables were there.
“The UAW and Carl Herbein got some buses and we went down,” she recalled.
“We were right at the corner of the reflecting pool and it was so quiet and so peaceful.
No one was shouting or violent.”
Looking at a copy of The Mercury that had a story about the speech, Millicent said on the bus home from the March, everyone knew they had witnessed something historic.
“Everyone was talking about how incredible the speech was,” she said.
Millicent pointed to a newspaper clipping of her husband speaking at Pottstown High School.
The date was April 8, 1968.
Three days after King was assassinated, Marable was in front of a Pottstown audience at the high school talking about King and his legacy.
“The night Dr. King was killed, I heard it on the radio and Chief (Red) Meyers from Pottstown called the house,” Marable said.
“He was afraid there was going to be a riot at Washington and King streets and he wanted Newstell to come down and help keep things under control.”
Working within the system
Newstell Marable was not just a protestor, speaker and organizer.
As a well-respected member of the community, he worked within the system as well.
From 1967 to 1969, he was the Community Organization Director for the Opportunity Board of Montgomery County, of which he was a charter member, and helped initiate health, education and anti-poverty programs in the county.
Also, from 1969 to 1977, Marable was community relations manager for the eastern seaboard for Gino’s Inc., helping develop better employment and community relations practices for the restaurant chain.
In 1978, he joined the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission and investigated complaints of discrimination against individuals and employers.
From 1980 to 1982, Marable was back in the private sector as Regional Marketing Manager for the East Coast, as well as the EEOC Officer for Sambo’s restaurants.
He convinced the officers of the company to change the racially insensitive name to Seasonal Restaurants.
Trained as a chemist, he worked at Pottstown Plating and, in 1982, opened Tec-Plating Inc. on Cross Street and, while there, was a consultant for Lucent Technologies and Bell Labs.
Persuading instead of protesting
He used quiet persuasion to help people and was often successful.
He helped Elaine Blakey get hired as the first African-American teller at National Penn Bank and convinced the owners of the New York Store to hire Kathleen Beasley, Marable said.
“He would meet with business owners and try to convince them why it would be a good idea to hire this person or that person,” Marable said.
“People thought he got paid to do those things,” she said with a chortle.
“I had a woman call the house one time looking for him and I said he wasn’t home.
She started yelling, ‘well he’s supposed to be here meeting with me right now, I mean that’s his job; that’s his job’ and I just said ‘excuse me?
’”
“He just wanted everyone to be treated fairly,” she said.