MAR
APR
May
5
2015
2016
2017
22 captures
28 Jan 14 - 5 Apr 16
Close Help
Search
History Biography Geography Science Games Login
History >> Civil Rights for Kids
Civil Rights
Birmingham Campaign
What was the Birmingham Campaign?
The Birmingham Campaign was a series of protests against racial segregation in Birmingham, Alabama that took place in April of 1963.
Background
In the early 1960s, Birmingham, Alabama was a very segregated city. This meant that black people and white people were kept separated. They had different schools, different restaurants, different water fountains, and different places they could live. There were even laws that allowed and enforced segregation called Jim Crow laws . In most cases, the facilities such as schools for black people were not as good as those for white people.
Planning a Protest
In order to bring the issue of segregation in Birmingham to the rest of the nation, several African-American leaders decided to organize a mass protest. These leaders included Martin Luther King, Jr. , Wyatt Tee Walker, and Fred Shuttlesworth.
Project C
The protests were codenamed Project C. The "C" stood for "confrontation." The protests would be non-violent and included boycotting downtown stores, sit-ins, and marches. The organizers thought that if enough people protested, the local government would be forced to "confront" them and this would make national news gaining them support from the federal government and the rest of the country.
The protests began on April 3, 1963. Volunteers boycotted downtown stores, marched through the streets, held sit-ins at all-white lunch counters, and held kneel-ins in all-white churches.
Going to Jail
The main opponent to the protesters was a Birmingham politician named Bull Connor. Connor got laws passed that said the protests were illegal. He threatened to arrest the protesters. On April 12, 1963, knowing they would get arrested, a number of protesters led by Martin Luther King, Jr. set out on a march. They were all arrested and sent to jail.
Letter from Birmingham Jail
King remained in Jail until April 20, 1963. While in jail he wrote his famous "Letter from Birmingham Jail." In this letter he outlined why his strategy for non-violent protest against racism was so important. He said that the people had a moral responsibility to break unjust laws. The letter has become an important document in the history of the American civil rights movement.
Youth Protests
Despite the efforts of the campaign, it wasn't getting the national attention the planners had hoped. They decided to include school children in the protests. On May 2, over one thousand African-American children skipped school and joined in the protests. Soon the Birmingham jails were overflowing with protesters.
The next day, with the jails full, Bull Connor decided to try and disperse the protesters in order to keep them from downtown Birmingham. He used police dogs and fire hoses on the children. Pictures of children getting knocked down by the spray from fire hoses and attacked by dogs made national news. The protests had grabbed the attention of the country.
An Agreement
The protests continued for several days, but on May 10th an agreement was reached between the protest organizers and the city of Birmingham. The segregation in the city would come to an end. There would no longer be separate restrooms, drinking fountains, and lunch counters. Black people would also be hired as salespeople and clerks in the stores.
Things Turn Violent
On May 11th, a bomb went off at the Gaston Motel where Martin Luther King, Jr. was staying. Fortunately he had left earlier. Another bomb blew up the home of King's younger brother A.D. King. In response to the bombings, the protesters became violent. They rioted throughout the city, burning buildings and cars and attacking police officers. Soldiers from the U.S. army were sent in to regain control.
The bombed hotel where Dr. King was staying
Results
Although there were still many issues with racism, the Birmingham campaign did break down some barriers with segregation in the city. When the new school year started up in September of 1963, the schools were integrated as well. Perhaps the most important result of the campaign was in bringing the issues to a national level and getting leaders such as President John F. Kennedy involved.
To learn more about Civil Rights:
Movements
African-American Civil Rights Movement
Apartheid
Disability Rights
Native American Rights
Slavery and Abolitionism
Women's Suffrage
Major Events
Jim Crow Laws
Montgomery Bus Boycott
Little Rock Nine
Birmingham Campaign
March on Washington
Civil Rights Act of 1964
Civil Rights Leaders
Susan B. Anthony
Ruby Bridges
Cesar Chavez
Frederick Douglass
Mohandas Gandhi
Helen Keller
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Nelson Mandela
Thurgood Marshall
Rosa Parks
Jackie Robinson
Elizabeth Cady Stanton
Mother Teresa
Sojourner Truth
Harriet Tubman
Booker T. Washington
Ida B. Wells
Overview
Civil Rights Timeline
African-American Civil Rights Timeline
Magna Carta
Bill of Rights
Emancipation Proclamation
Glossary and Terms
Works Cited
History >> Civil Rights for Kids
More polls
Homework
Animals
Math
History
Biography
Money and Finance
Biography
Artists
Civil Rights Leaders
Entrepreneurs
Explorers
Inventors and Scientists
US Presidents
Science
Biology
Chemistry
Earth Science
Physics
US History
Native Americans
Colonial America
American Revolution
Industrial Revolution
American Civil War
Westward Expansion
The Great Depression
Civil Rights Movement
Cold War
Pre-1900s
1900 to Present
US Government
US State History
Geography
United States
Africa
Asia
Central America
Europe
Middle East
North America
Oceania
South America
Southeast Asia
World History
Ancient Africa
Ancient China
Ancient Egypt
Ancient Greece
Ancient Mesopotamia
Ancient Rome
Middle Ages
Renaissance
Aztec, Maya, Inca
World War 1
World War 2
Cold War
Art History
Other
Family Vacations
Jokes
Movies
Music
Games
All Games
Geography Games
Word Searches
Battleship
Checkers
Chess
Fast Math
Hangman
Math Game
Crossword Puzzles
Typing Game
Sports
Baseball
Basketball
Football
Soccer
About Ducksters  
  Privacy Policy
About Ducksters Premium Ducksters Premium FAQ Login
Last updated:
This site is a product of TSI (Technological Solutions, Inc.), Copyright 2016, All Rights Reserved. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use.