SEP
APR
May
5
2011
2016
2017
4 captures
2 Jul 11 - 5 Apr 16
Close Help
Home
About
Help
BASIC SEARCH
in
Go
Advanced Search
Previous Results
BROWSE
Events
Places
People
Topics
Educator Resources
Media Types
Contributing Institutions
Collections A-Z
Webadmin: Edit (This page) Workform (New) Search Site Map Logout
Home  » Events  » Birmingham Demonstrations
Birmingham Demonstrations
Background:
Despite energetic organization on the local level, Birmingham, Alabama remained a largely segregated city in the spring of 1963 when Martin Luther King Jr. and his colleagues at the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) launched Project C (for confrontation), an ambitious program that wedded economic pressure and large scale direct action protest to undermine the city's rigid system of segregation.
After conducting sit-ins, hosting mass meetings, and waging an economic boycott, the campaign received national media attention on April 7th when Public Safety Commissioner T. Eugene "Bull" Connor loosed police attack dogs on marchers undertaking nonviolent protest.
King's decision to disregard a federal court injunction barring further demonstrations resulted in his arrest, along with local leader Fred L. Shuttlesworth, and many others on April 12th.
While imprisoned, King penned "A Letter from Birmingham Jail," his eloquent response to critics of direct action protest.
On May 3rd, Birmingham police used high pressure fire hoses to disrupt a peaceful demonstration composed largely of students, thereby provoking national outrage and prompting federal intervention.
Officials from the Kennedy administration helped negotiate a settlement on May 10th, but rioting ensued the very next day in response to the bombing by Klansmen of the A.G. Gaston Motel and the home of the Reverend A.D. King.
Despite the high cost, events in Birmingham helped galvanize national support for civil rights reform and contributed to the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Expand all | Collapse all | Results view
Archival Collections and Reference Resources
The Civil Rights Era in the U.S. News & World Report Photographs Collection: Selected Images from the Collections of the Library of Congress (Library of Congress)
Bomb-damaged trailers at the Gaston Motel, Birmingham, Alabama (Black-and-white photographs)
Encyclopedia of Alabama (Encyclopedia of Alabama)
Birmingham Campaign of 1963 (Articles)
Fred Lee Shuttlesworth (Articles)
"Letter from Birmingham Jail" (Articles)
Modern Civil Rights Movement in Alabama (Articles)
Powerful Days in Black and White (Eastman Kodak Company)
Powerful days in black and white (Black-and-white photographs)
Robert R. Church Family Papers (University of Memphis.
Special Collections Dept.)
Letter from Birmingham City Jail (Text)
Voices of Freedom: The Virginia Civil Rights Movement (Virginia Commonwealth University Libraries)
Bomb-damaged trailers at the Gaston Motel, Birmingham, Alabama (Black-and-white photographs)
WSB-TV Newsfilm Collection (Walter J. Brown Media Archives and Peabody Awards Collection)
WSB-TV newsfilm clip of attorney general Robert Kennedy reporting on the racial conflict situation in Birmingham, Alabama, 1963 May 13 (Moving images)
WSB-TV newsfilm clip of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. presenting four demands of the civil rights movement in Birmingham, Alabama, 1963 May 5 (Moving images)
WSB-TV newsfilm clip of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. speaking to reporters following the court-ordered reinstatement of over one thousand students suspended from school for participating in civil rights demonstrations, Birmingham, Alabama, 1963 May 23 (Moving images)
WSB-TV newsfilm clip of former heavyweight boxing champion Floyd Patterson speaking to a reporter about the civil rights movement in Birmingham, Alabama, 1963 May 9 (Moving images)
WSB-TV newsfilm clip of George Huddleston, Jr., Alabama congressman, suggesting connections between communists and civil rights workers in Washington, D.C., 1963 May 13 (Moving images)
WSB-TV newsfilm clip of John F. Kennedy speaking at a press conference about civil rights demonstrations and the federal government's support and protection in Birmingham, Alabama, 1963 May 12 (Moving images)
WSB-TV newsfilm clip of Malcolm X condemning the federal government for not protecting African commenting on violence in Birmingham, Alabama, 1963 May 16 (Moving images)
WSB-TV newsfilm clip of mayor Albert Boutwell speaking to the city's new biracial committee in Birmingham, Alabama, 1963 July 16 (Moving images)
WSB-TV newsfilm clip of president John F. Kennedy in a press conference expressing his satisfaction with progress in resolving racial conflicts in Birmingham, Alabama, 1963 May 8 (Moving images)
WSB-TV newsfilm clip of the bombed ruins of the A.G. Gaston Motel and law enforcement patrolling the streets after a series of riots in Birmingham, Alabama, 1963 May 11 (Moving images)
WSB-TV newsfilm clip of three Alabama newspaper editors, including Alabama Press  Association president Herve Charest, speaking to reporters following a meeting with president John F. Kennedy in Washington, D.C., 1963 May 14 (Moving images)
Educator Resources
Amistad Digital Resource for Teaching African American History (Columbia Center for Digital Research and Scholarship)
Amistad Digital Resource for Teaching African American History (Instructional materials)
For Teachers and Students (Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History)
The Civil Rights movement: The promise of democracy; JFK's radio and television report to the American people on civil rights, June 11, 1963 (Instructional materials)
Teachers' Domain Civil Rights Special Collection (WGBH Educational Foundation)
Burke Marshall (Instructional materials)
Miriam McClendon (Instructional materials)
Rev. Fred Shuttlesworth (Instructional materials)
Washington Booker, III (Instructional materials)
Last modified: January 01, 2016
close
Page code: birmingham_demonstrations
Page content file: content/events/event.
html
Webadmin: Login
Contact Us | Site Map | About Us | Help
The Digital Library of Georgia is part of the GALILEO Initiative .
© 2013 Digital Library of Georgia
The Civil Rights Digital Library receives support from a National Leadership Grant for Libraries awarded by The Institute of Museum and Library Services .