NoSleep is a place for authors to share their original horror stories. For a more detailed explanation of the subreddit, click here.
Suspension of disbelief is key here. Everything is true here, even if it's not. Don't be the jerk in the movie theater hee-hawing because monkeys don't fly.
Still confused?  Check out the rules and guidelines or ask your questions in /r/NoSleepOOC !
Note: Please attempt to secure permission from the authors before posting, narrating, or sharing a story elsewhere. Authors work very hard on their stories and credit should be given to them for their work.
Posting Rules:
Read the Posting Guidelines & Author FAQ, and make sure your story fits all the guidelines before posting.
Only post your original stories. Plagiarism, posting creepypasta, or band-wagoning another writer’s story are against the rules. Even if you are the original author of a story found elsewhere on the internet, the post runs the risk of removal if you cannot prove this to the moderators. This is to protect the intellectual property of the writers.
Posts that are not stories belong in our discussion subreddit, r/nosleepOOC . If it is not an actual story, it will be removed from r/nosleep .
Stories must be believable within reason. A more detailed explanation can be found in the posting guidelines.
Do not comment out of character in your thread. Example: saying “I wrote this for English class” in your post or in the comments would be “out of character,” as it takes away the reader’s ability to immerse themselves in your story.
Graphic content must be marked with a Trigger Warning (NSFW).
Do not include a TL;DR with your post, and do not summarize the plot in your title. This is a subreddit for scary stories, not scary summaries. Get creative, and find a way to define your story without giving it away.
Tags (example: [True], [real experience], /r/someothersubreddit ) are not allowed. The only thing in brackets[]{} or parenthesis() should be a reference to which “part” of your series the post is. Example: (part 1) [Pt2] On tagging other subreddits in your titles- this is misleading and has become an issue. Rule-breaking tags will result in a post removal.
You may only post once every 24 hours. This goes for one-post stories as well as series posts. See the posting guidelines.
Comment Rules:
Readers are to act as though everything is true and treat it as such in the comments.
No debunking, disbelief, or criticism (constructive or otherwise). If the formatting is off, report the post and mods will address it.
No “backseat modding.” If something breaks a rule, report it- don’t go all vigilante and start correcting other users.
Do not ask for proof or tl;dr’s.
Be respectful to one another- this means no disrespectful, derogatory, or otherwise unkind comments towards or about one another. This also means no hate speech- if you can’t be civil, you can’t comment.
Comments must contribute to the discussion. This means no joke comments- “nope,” “all aboard the nopetrain,” “who was phone,” none of that. It also means your comment should have or make a point.
Report all comments that violate these rules.
Read the Reader FAQ !
Any violation of these rules will be met with appropriate discipline. Inappropriate posts and comments will be removed at moderator discretion.  Harassment of users, repeated rule violations, or reposting removed stories can and will result in a ban.