JAN
MAY
Jun
8
2014
2016
2017
17 captures
9 Oct 12 - 8 May 16
Close Help
Paranormal
Haunted Places to Visit
Most Haunted TV Guide
Have you seen a Ghost?
History
Films
Film Reviews
List of Horror & Supernatural Films
Television
Shop
Contribute
Writer Positions Vacant
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
YouTube
RSS
2 Shares
Dark History
Joe Hesketh: A Pendle Witch Trial Investigation
Joe Hesketh: A Pendle Witch Trial Investigation
Staff Writer
8th October 2012
Artist JOE HESKETH seeks to understand the horrors of the Pendle Witch Trial through art
Being a child in Pendle was like living on, what would now be familiar as, a Harry Potter film set.
Some of the older children thought I was a bit odd, so I took advantage of this and played on being different and standing out.
I played at making up my own spells, creating perfume from petals, and things like that.
These games made me happy and I thought they gave me the upper hand and made me special – just like the witches, I guess.
Over the years people have bought me spell books and I still do well wishes today.
I’ve always been intrigued with the Pendle story and wanted to look at it closer and, through doing this, A Pendle Investigation developed.
I wanted to connect with the story in celebration of the 400th anniversary by investigating the known facts to build a body of work.
My work is mainly about my life and, for me, Pendle, was the natural step and progression in my artistic journey.
Lots of things have changed in 400 years but, you know, lots have not.
The Pendle Witch Trials are revered in popular culture but usually misunderstood in the context of their time.
I really want people to see the true story of injustice and the real story about people of the land who were basically healers rather than evil magicians.
In 1612, these people were dreadfully misjudged and, even today, some are still quick to judge a book by its cover.
I get this all the time, people judge me instantly and it seemed to be the same with the witches, that people judged them for being different.
I’m not saying that people don’t accept me, but that people like to put other people in boxes.
I think this shows the shallow nature of our society.
People are not always what they seem to others.
The twelve accused of witchcraft lived around Pendle Hill and were charged with the murders of ten people.
Of the eleven who went to trial – nine women and two men – ten were found guilty and hanged.
It has been estimated that all of the English witch trials that took place between the 15th and 18th centuries resulted in fewer than 500 executions; the Pendle Witch Trials account for more than two per cent of that total.
If the witches who were tried were guilty of anything, it was of being simple folk who were simply trying to survive.
Most were very poor, single women with no men to support them.
If anything they were of guilty of just being different, having different beliefs and an understanding of the earth and herbal medicines.
I wanted to really feel and understand the story, not just read the books, which I had already done.
So I thought, why not walk the path and follow in their footsteps.
As a result, in 2011, I spent four days walking the long Purgatory Trail that links Pendle Forest and Lancaster Castle, the two main sites of the infamous Trials.
I don’t think I was fully prepared for the way it affected me.
I was on my own for long periods of time and it was a very powerful experience.
One day it felt as if they were following me; it was eerie, I looked back at one point and for a split second I saw four women sat down wearing dark clothes.
The next second there were only bushes.
I’d been thinking about the witches a lot, it’s hard to understand that this is the actual road they were taken on.
Obviously things have changed – the tarmac for one – but when you look around and see the ancient twisted trees and the bubbles of the trickling river, you can imagine yourself right there.
Also, the weather was atrocious when I walked – I’d wanted it to be grim, but not this grim.
I was soaked through and miserable but that was nothing in comparison to the sufferings of those women.
After all, I wasn’t hung at the end.
Although it happened so long ago, these events mark the society we live in today, ranging from bus routes named the Witchway, the décor of the local pubs and local ales named after themed links.
Some people still don’t want to talk about the Trials and some church schools still won’t cover the story as history.
Pendle is an area where many new cultures have settled, yet they are still treated differently because of their beliefs – being different isn’t always welcomed and probably never will be.
People up to now have been really moved with the work, more so if they know the story, but I hope a connection is made with the images even if they don’t.
From my experience, most people in London haven’t even heard of the Pendle Witches so I think it’s great education and helps to put the area on the map.
I aim to bring a contemporary outlook to the violent story, resonating with my own experiences as a woman of Pendle.
A Pendle Investigation is at The Newman Street Gallery, 18 Newman Street, London W1T 1PE from Wednesday 31st October – Thursday 22nd November 2012.
The gallery is open Tuesday-Saturday, 10am – 6pm.
Joe Hesketh’s website is here .
Related Items Pendle Witches Witchcraft
Click to add a comment
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.
Required fields are marked *
Comment
Name *
Email *
Website
Dark History
8th October 2012
Staff Writer @spookyisles
Related Items Pendle Witches Witchcraft
More in Dark History
Return to the ‘Witches’ of Islandmagee, County Antrim
Janet Quinlivan19th April 2016
Read More
Curse of the Brampton Witch’s Tea Set
Barry McCann10th April 2016
Read More
Murder and Martyrdom, 7 Irish Saints and Sinners
Ann O'Regan17th March 2016
Read More
Batman versus Jack the Ripper
Andrew Garvey9th March 2016
Read More
The Demise Of The Great Lafayette
MJ Steel Collins4th January 2016
Read More
Pearlin’ Jean: A Ghost Story Of Umpteen Variations
MJ Steel Collins30th December 2015
Read More
Aleister Crowley’s Former Scottish Home Severely Damaged In Fire
MJ Steel Collins24th December 2015
Read More
The Dark Side of Magic: Witches and the Sidhe
Amy Van De Casteele22nd December 2015
Read More
Stoney Middleton’s Dark Past
Guest Writer16th December 2015
Read More
The real ‘Ophelia’ and other horrors haunt Clopton House
Pollyanna Jones13th November 2015
Read More
Do Ripper victim ghosts haunt Whitechapel?
Jon Rees21st October 2015
Read More
Are these ghosts Jack the Ripper?
Jon Rees14th October 2015
Read More
Scroll for more
Tap
Popular
Latest
Comments
5 Haunted Places to Visit in Birmingham
Paranormal6th March 2015
5 Haunted Places to Visit in Cork
Paranormal9th January 2014
Why I Believe in the Enfield Poltergeist
Paranormal14th September 2013
5 Haunted Places to Visit in Belfast
Paranormal21st October 2014
Glasgow Theatre Royal Ghost Tour REVIEW
Paranormal7th December 2014
Haunted Kellie Castle, Fife
Paranormal7th May 2016
For sale: 12-bedroom ‘haunted house’, with views of the Atlantic, for the same price as a London flat
News6th May 2016
‘Haunted’ Carbisdale Castle near Ardgay up for sale
News6th May 2016
Is Wrexham pub the most haunted in Wales?
News6th May 2016
Fancy owning ‘haunted’ gaol on Anglesey?
News6th May 2016
Mike says:
Great review, Ann!
I'm booked in on the tour next…
John Fraser says:
Does anyone know what happened to the previous owners of…
Dale Haskell says:
I'd like to add Dan Curtis' Dracula with Jack Palance…
Froggo Zijgeb says:
The picture yz fake.
Although it became iconic, the Chinnery…
Dacre Stoker says:
Many thanks Dave for posting this information about the tour…
Roy says:
I believe Dracula (1979) is better than some on your…
Patricia lambert says:
I thought the place they were taken to for last…
M J Steel Collins says:
I visited during the day.
The Hall is closed until…
Rachel says:
Hi, how did you go about hiring the hall?
I'm…
Garry Johnson says:
What a load of shite.
Glad to say I've had…
ka says:
In school on successmaker in computer lab had said the…
Phil Whyman says:
I personally thought that series 2,3, & 4 were the…
Phil Whyman says:
(Try again, this time without the lousy spelling mistakes!)
I…
Pihl Whyman says:
I investigated Chingle Hall on four times, each time something…
Ann O'Regan says:
Great review Andrew and I have to agree - I…
Amanda Pike says:
Bookworm (Roddy McDowell) was on Alfred Hitchcock presents, Legend of…
Staff Writer says:
No John Fraser either :)!!
John Fraser says:
What no Steven Parsons ?
;)
becky keane says:
Yes Chris I have been to Houghton tower was very…
Steve Parsons says:
What no Zack Bagens !!
I would with John about…
John Fraser says:
Please don't put the over dramatic fiction writer O'Donell in…
Casey Brandon says:
I too have heard version of the story that attribute…
ama says:
Ms Hudson is NOT a "transvestite fellow addict with several…
entoncesallora says:
Ms. Hudson is not a transvestite.
She is a transgender…
Chris guy says:
Not a road but have you visited houghton tower nr…
cliff says:
Here's a little more on Veronica's career and bio: http://bmoviebabes.blogspot.com/2016/03/33-veronica-carlson.html
John Fraser says:
There were noises from the stables when I went and…
Jo says:
Two friends and I stayed the night at Chingle Hall…
Staff Writer says:
Yes you are correct Allison!
Thanks for the pickup.
It…
Hallie says:
My daughter was born in her entire sac.
I was…
Phil Carter says:
So.
.
when all is said and done....None of them did it.
…
Heidi says:
I live about half an hour away from here and…
RYOLITE 38 says:
its also been going on in the 1980's too,with some…
Richard Mason says:
I was once walking up Comber Rd towards Ballybeen Estate…
Norman Dunbar says:
Cheers for that Brian, glad you liked my (True) tale,…
Brian Langston says:
This is a great story, well told Norman and best…
Jack says:
Jennet was the daughter of Elizabeth Device, sister of Alizon.
Rob Lupine says:
Reading the comments above by Junior Teacher I feel compelled…
Amanda Pike says:
I'm not very forgiving.
The director called the original Frankenstein…
Dead of Night (Devil’s Advocates) explores classic horror – The Spooky Isles says:
[…] before Amicus Productions produced its first anthology horror picture,…
Carmen says:
I was born en caul and I was full term…
Mark McC says:
I lived near Crebilly when I was a kid and…
Ann O'Regan says:
Absolutely there are!
A short twenty minute drive to Askeaton…
Community Post: 17 Haunted Places In Britain Even Ghosts Should Avoid | Awesome Likey says:
[…] Via spookyisles.com […]
Kathy says:
I live up that direction and there was one or…
L Kraus says:
We are coming to Ireland in April, and are staying…
Janet Quinlivan says:
Thank you Kathy :)
13 spine-chilling Irish Ghosts facts – The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Leap Castle is one of Ireland’s most haunted destinations…
Ann O'Regan says:
You are indeed correct and it has now been rectified,…
Seamus says:
The correct spelling for the Irish word for ghost is…
Kathy says:
Fantastic article on a great team!
A great read and…
Damien says:
Hi just wondering where you got the information for this…
Mary Denny says:
Very well done Hugh and Ann.
X
jules says:
I live in Norfolk about 15 miles from Muckleburgh and…
Chris Watson says:
Yes , about 40 years ago I was in the…
Markus says:
I know the previous occupants of the Liverpool Arms and…
Kathy says:
Brilliant read!
Thank you Janet!
Turlough says:
Re: The gap in the Channel 4 schedule.
I had…
Andy Jones says:
I distinctly remember watching FMtWM and some of the Mummy…
Sheldon Hall says:
The screening of HOUSE OF DRACULA was on 19 April.
…
Simon Ball says:
yes Moffat and Gatiss have strayed a bit too far…
Peter murphy says:
I saw her, looked exactly the same as mask pic,…
Randi says:
Fascinating collection of beautiful, and spooky, old castles!
So interesting…
Neil Duckmanton says:
As far as I was ever aware from reading the…
Loree says:
Hi there!
I, too was born en caul (complete amniotic…
Aidy says:
I went to school with the boy who used the…
Jean-Claude MICHEL says:
After the injection shot, the struggle between the doctors and…
Jean-Claude MICHEL says:
I really don't understand why anybody would watch a scratchy…
Jean-Claude MICHEL says:
Excuse me, but perhaps you could corrige the bad spelling…
Jean-Claude MICHEL says:
You will be surprised, but this obscure British movie was…
Kamzi says:
I know this to be a fake as I was…
Mrs G J Gray says:
I love Sir Christopher Lee reading stories.
Mrs G J Gray says:
I have enjoyed all of Christopher Lee's films and I…
Blog Tour: There Will Be Lies - Ex Libris says:
[…] a place where someone who died during the An…
Five hauntings that may prove ghosts exist – The Spooky Isles says:
[…] in the United States have a saying “Show Me”.
…
Jennifer Parr says:
The information regarding the Blackpool Illuminations Depot is completely wrong…
Community Post: 17 Haunted Places In Britain Even Ghosts Should Avoid | 4stayingwell says:
[…] Via spookyisles.com […]
Paul Fitz-George says:
Your readers may be interested in more tales about haunted…
M J Steel Collins says:
I'm not sure if anyone has.
It would certainly be…
Mary Lindsay says:
Does anyone know whatever happened to the Lindsay family?
Or…
kimberley says:
I really enjoyed reading this intriguing account of the rituals…
Gary Rhodes says:
Having translated the full text of DRAKULA HALALA for a…
Brian says:
Wonderful story Ann- beautifully told.
I hadn't heard this fascinating…
Roger lambert says:
Just watched your film about the King and tinker pub…
Monster of the Week: Hellhounds | The Supernatural Fox Sisters says:
[…] localized British Isle harbinger hellhounds include the Barghest of…
kimberley says:
A beautiful article......
I loved it thank you Ann.
I love…
kimberley says:
A fascinating and gutsy article; I really enjoyed readinv a…
Company of Wolves Conference Announced – The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Carter’s werewolves in her collection The Bloody Chamber (1984);…
Ian Ratcliffe says:
Brought back memories, scary as hell at the time,
kimberley says:
Intriguing histories Ann...an enjoyable read thank you.
KC
kimberley says:
Fascinating reading Ann!
I'd best visit Dublin again and follow…
Erik Taros says:
I lived as a lodger in Abernathy House during 1981-1982...it…
Throbbing Gristle - 20 Jazz Funk Greats (1979) | Noiselab says:
[…] portada del disco muestra al cuarteto pionero de la…
Vicky says:
Just to be pedantic, the Grimsby dock story isn't recent.
…
R says:
From experience I can confirm that Wilmont House within Sir…
Ashley says:
Your info is wrong.
Being born in the sac does…
Community Post: 17 Haunted Places In Britain Even Ghosts Should Avoid | Viral Luxury says:
[…] Via spookyisles.com […]
Ken Rodziewicz says:
I am probably the only living person who knew Mikicura.
…
Amy Van De Casteele says:
I have a new LinkedIn, http://www.linkedin.com/contacts/view?id=li_314820065&trk=contacts-contacts-list-contact_name-0
Kat Head says:
Absolutely love this film.
Could not tell you how many…
15 things you didn’t know about The Last Man on Earth (1964) – The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Following the success The Quatermass Experiment (aka The Creeping…
Amy Van De Casteele says:
Aww what no comments come on guys!
Lame!
Diana says:
Very Well Writing and the way you wrote it ,was…
My Real Phantom of the Opera: The Cockpit Theatre London – The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Have you seen a Ghost?
[…]
Highgate Vampire Symposium interview with Della Farrant – The Spooky Isles says:
[…] The Gatehouse is one of the earliest remnants of…
Kimberley Christie says:
What an amazing man Interesting that he made the metal…
Gary says:
I remember reading this story in Andrew Green's 'Our Haunted…
Kimberley Christie says:
Hi Ann Really enjoyed this article I visited all those…
10 historic disappearances that are still a mystery – The Spooky Isles says:
[…] the village of Shepton Mallet, Owen Parfitt sat outside…
Junior Teacher says:
As a teacher who was there at the time of…
Steve wormell says:
in your article you refere to a Mrs Cummings at…
Neil Arnold says:
Sadly a majority of these stories are unfounded - many…
Tom Ruffles says:
It should be now.
Top 10 Creepiest Kids in British Horror – The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Dead Of Night (1945) […]
Brian Langston says:
Another wonderfully macabre story Polly!
nanagodzilla says:
Can't wait for the second season.
The brilliant narration, the…
Tom Ruffles says:
Winston S Churchill was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature…
Staff Writer says:
The link isn't working.
Tom Ruffles says:
You may be interested to see my analysis of the…
Kelly says:
Would be good to include proper details about the haunting…
david says:
We are still here
Ian Elder says:
Interesting stories about Glasgow's wee but loved subway.
Just a…
kimberley says:
Thank you for this really fascinating article.
I also doubt…
jim conway says:
If you are near lurgan co Armagh you should visit…
5 Haunted Places to Visit in Preston – The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Chingle Hall has to be one of the spookiest…
MJ Steel Collins says:
Glad you enjoyed it!
MJ Steel Collins says:
Thanks.
It's a great place.
I loved being a student…
kimberley says:
Really interesting story thank you.
I will be sure to…
kimberley says:
I really enjoyed this exciting article thank you.
Patricia OSBORN says:
I very much believe they can and do we feel…
kym says:
Thank you I found that really fascinating.
I will get…
Jon Kaneko-James says:
Barry - that's interesting, I hadn't thought perhaps as much…
Barry McCann says:
Good article and, yes, the conclusions are spot on.
There…
Staff Writer says:
Thanks Abelia, we've gone through and edited it.
Regards
Abelia says:
Too many typos and misused words to read.
"Patents" instead…
Toni Franck says:
Not sure which was worse - dad and me leaving…
Simon Ball says:
yes I'm sure Gattiss would have produced a far better…
Barry McCann says:
It is a pity Hammer never got to film The…
pat carroll says:
as a Govanite, and having grown up in Kintra St…
kimberley Christie says:
I loved Cobh!
Fascinating article!
Marion says:
i also heard that the White House in North road…
Chris says:
you forgot to mention the cock lane ghost which has…
Barry McCann says:
Hi Rebecca.
Thanks for the comment.
I have double checked…
Rebecca Keane says:
P's great review
Rebecca Keane says:
Only thing I have to dispute with this is tynedale…
Stewart says:
Best most haunted live ever, they need to bring it…
John says:
Great Interview... Dani is a top lady!!
Thanks for sharing!!
HJ says:
Excellent advice.
It would seem these malevolent fey folk have…
Becky Keane says:
I find most of Stephen Kings books are actually better…
kimberley Christie says:
Ann I really enjoyed this article.
Very fascinating.
Thank you.
…
Mark Norman - Folklore Writer and Researcher says:
I am giving a talk to the Folklore Society's annual…
Barry McCann says:
Good and fair review.
I always thought Scars was very…
Jon Kaneko-James says:
Did you also know that he negotiated a deal with…
Ramsey Campbell says:
"The “H” awarded to 1943’s The Return Of The Vampire…
Nancy C Lea says:
You failed to mention the "Ghost Legion?"
That's the most…
trev hill says:
Wasn't David Copperfield (in Dickens's book)born cauled and the caul…
Simon Ball says:
Also in the cast is a 13 year old Gwyneth…
Brian Langston says:
Great article MJ...and keep plugging away on that book.
It's…
alexander macdonald says:
I visited borley for the first time in april,2003.
i as…
Kathy says:
great read!!
Loved it!!!
Jason Hollis says:
Medieval history is littered with scapegoats and the Jews were…
Carl Grove says:
I have been investigating a local disappearing house mystery for…
Staff Writer says:
Thanks Colin, we've fixed the error.
Poppy says:
It was very interesting and informative!
Great for my English…
Colin says:
Great blog,don't mean to split hairs but Lady Pearce's name…
Mark G. says:
The tagline "Love means never having to say you're ugly"…
Jens G. Clausen says:
Is not it possible that the animations for the Phibes…
E.P.D. Gaffney.
says:
I'd love to know what they called this in Irish…
paul says:
I live up the street from belvoir park hospital and…
Staff Writer says:
What a wonderful memory of a great film and obviously…
Mike Covell says:
Great article Peter, may I add number 20.
My dear…
Staff Writer says:
Thanks Pat, Govan sounds like a real spooky place!
Pat Carroll says:
i remember the Hunty from the Fifties when i lived…
Staff Writer says:
Hi, why don't you send it to us and we…
Bob Smillie says:
Pity you did not include the poem "the B;ack Lady"…
Felicity says:
I've always known both my Dad and I were born…
Peter baird says:
Exellent story of the Glasgow theatre royal very scary, I…
Jason Egan says:
Fantastic review, a lot of work has definitely been put…
Lanie.dre says:
My son was born April 15 2013 with a veil…
aaron mcgregor says:
wher would be the best haunted place in swindon to…
Simon Ball says:
Ernest Thesiger's 'I like gin" must be one of the…
ray says:
there is n o police station to run to In…
Dean Anthony says:
You're more than welcome, David.
The Spooky Isles says:
That's fantastic news Dean, I've just bought my copy!
:)
Dean Anthony says:
I have been searching for ''Out of the Darkness'' for…
Moric Erianna says:
Hi Everyone,This was how me and my BF become VAMPIRES…
Robert says:
Good day, I am Robert from United States, Vampire is…
Dave Sharpe says:
Mischa, the programme you're referring to is the first episode…
Bryan says:
Christopher Lee is an over-rated actor in my opinion.
The…
Johnny Davidson says:
Were you possessed when you wrote this by any chance?
…
MLA says:
I object to being FORCED to "share" your article before…
boipelo says:
Good day,my mother told me when i was growing up…
Simon Ball says:
And then there is The Beast Must Die (1974) where…
Alp-Luachra, The Flesh-Burrowing Faerie | Jon Kaneko-James says:
[…] READ MORE ON THE SPOOKY ISLES […]
Richard Phillips-Jones says:
Spot-on summation of this curio.
Incidentally, Patrick Mower has some…
The Dark Origins of Halloween | The Devil's Davenport says:
[…] READ MORE ON THE SPOOKY ISLES […]
The Deadly Chicken-Lizard of Hampshire | The Devil's Davenport says:
[…] READ MORE ON THE SPOOKY ISLES […]
Yeth Hounds, Lost Souls of the Moors | The Devil's Davenport says:
[…] READ MORE ON THE SPOOKY ISLES […]
The Selkie Wife | The Devil's Davenport says:
[…] READ MORE ON THE SPOOKY ISLES […]
The Fachen, A Strange Giant | The Devil's Davenport says:
[…] READ MORE ON THE SPOOKY ISLES […]
The Brag: Shape-Shifting Devil-Horse | The Devil's Davenport says:
[…] READ MORE ON THE SPOOKY ISLES […]
Vampires and Zombies, Walter Map’s Mysterious Herefordshire | The Devil's Davenport says:
[…] READ MORE ON THE SPOOKY ISLES […]
Welsh Historians and the Medieval Occult | The Devil's Davenport says:
[…] READ MORE ON THE SPOOKY ISLES […]
Arthur Machen, Wales’ Master of Horror | The Devil's Davenport says:
[…] READ MORE ON THE SPOOKY ISLES […]
Who Was Jack O’Kent?
| The Devil's Davenport says:
[…] READ MORE ON THE SPOOKY ISLES […]
Doctor Who ‘Time Heist’ REVIEW | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Time Heist, co-written between Moff and previous collaborator Stephen…
Finfolkaheem – the real R’lyeh!
| Boo Tours says:
[…] peaceful race who occasionally seduced human women, and whose…
sean mcneaney says:
Thank You, I enjoyed this very much.
My home county…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
I really enjoyed this minisode, I just wish it was…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
1983 ( Diaries of a Doctor Who fan) Friday 25…
Andrew Dexter says:
This was an interesting review indeed.
I watched the episode…
barbara says:
I still getting the confirmation.
Of the aron theory I…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
This is really very interesting indeed, I have this film…
Karen says:
There are so many questions.
I have a real problem…
Andrew Dexter says:
A very good review indeed.
I have been a Doctor…
Theatre of Blood Location Guide with Peter Fuller | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] 1973 black comedy horror, Theatre of Blood, gave horror…
Khandie Khisses says:
Thank you guys xxxx
Spooky Diary (7 August to 13 August) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] am so looking forward to this, and imagine it…
Linda Corby says:
Good one, should you decided to do the same for…
Simon Ball says:
I remember the late night saturday movie double bills at…
Trip to the local Horror Cinema, Circa 1970 | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] for instance Dracula Prince Of Darkness, already five years…
W.B. Yeats, poet and paranormalist | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] group has since gained notoriety due to one of…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
I have read up on Borley and I find it…
Dark Morte takes on FrightFest 2014 | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] premiering at FrightFest) and Paul Ewen professional movie monster’…
Chad says:
Apaches was the first movie that really gave me a…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
Christopher Lee any day!
Bela's 1931 Dracula was so boring.
Andrew Dexter.
says:
This is a truly classic 1970's hammer horror film, I…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
I remember watching this film in August 1979 as part…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
Christopher Lee, the best Dracula.
Andrew Dexter.
says:
Classic 70's film, I can remember watching this for the…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
Redz Parc hotel in the former mining town of Bargoed…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
I watched the episode with my ten year old son…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
I have been a Doctor Who fan since the early…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
I have been fascinated by the Enfield poltergeist for a…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
I can understand why it would annoy someone about the…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
I believe that 'some' of this case was actually genuine.
Andrew Dexter.
says:
This was a very interesting read.
I have been fascinated…
Andrew Dexter.
says:
I remember seeing this as a child in 1976 during…
Spooky Diary (31 August to 6 September) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] 1665 Cucklet Church, Eyam, Derbyshire.
Today, on the last…
Origins of the Enfield Poltergeist | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] After everything that happened at the house many experts…
Simon Ball says:
The movie this reminded me a a bit of was…
Simon Ball says:
I quite enjoyed this despite being fed up to the…
Peter says:
I got a real thrill seeing Brian Miller playing the…
Spooky Diary (15 June to 21 June) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] horror in glorious Technicolor, in the form of Dracula…
Simon Ball says:
Julia Roberts adopts the weidest accent for Mary in this…
Simon Ball says:
A lot of people think that the theme tune to…
Simon Ball says:
Oh that's brilliant, love it
Written in Blood: A Cultural History of the British Vampire REVIEW | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Adams’ book, Written in Blood, fills this void for…
Stuart says:
One of the stories which always sticks out for me…
The Spooky Isles says:
What a really cool story :)
Karen says:
Simple.
Elegant.
Brilliant.
Richard says:
Audrey Rose is an excellent choice - one of the…
Led Zeppelin, Runes, Rock And Revenge | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] comes in useful at the most unexpected of times.
…
neil says:
So great.
I want to go there now :-*
Spooky Diary (10 August to 16 August) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Birth of Alfred Hitchcock, Leytonstone, […]
Spooky Diary (10 August to 16 August) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] 1902 Birth of Curt Siodmak, German-English author and screenwriter,…
The Ghosts of M.R. James PART 1 | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Part 2 of The Ghosts of MR James […]
The Ghosts of M.R. James PART 3 | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] horrors and wraiths which haunt the work of M.R.…
The Spooky Isles says:
Sounds like a great idea Peter - who do you…
Peter Fuller says:
Great little piece.
Makes me want to make a film…
The Spooky Isles says:
You can find it on Amazon here: http://amzn.to/1kskGOW
The Spooky Isles says:
Yes, even if it was haunted, it looks like a…
Joe says:
I would love to stay for the night in a…
Teresa Monk says:
I visited Kilmainhaim Jail when I visited Dublin a few…
Darren H. says:
Wow I never heard of this before.
It looks like…
Welsh paranormal team discovers Incubus demon sex attacks | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] JONATHON SCOTT, of Gwent Paranormal Group, describes the team’s first…
Witchtrials in London: A Walpurgis Night Special | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Haunts and Horrors is going to celebrate Walpurgis Night…
Terry says:
Hannibal Leckter lol!
How many Horror Films has Anthony Hopkins been in?
| The Spooky Isles says:
[…] of its most celebrated are Ray Milland and Anthony Hopkins,…
Jack O’Kent, the Welsh Doctor Faustus | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] More of us know of Doctor Faustus, made famous…
Most Haunted: Aberglasney House REVIEW | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Summary:  Read Jan McDonald’s article on The Ghosts of…
Ripper Victims: Their Final Resting Places | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] afternoon of 8th November, Mary Jane Kelly left her lodgings…
Lionel Atwill, Horror Star’s Hollywood Sex Scandal | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Amazon and read his interview with The Spooky Isles…
Lionel Atwill, Horror Star’s Hollywood Sex Scandal | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] than a Monster.
You can buy his book here…
The Ghosts of Aberglasney House | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] One paranormal phenomena dating back many centuries in Wales…
Mandy says:
This case has always intrigued me.
Came across it when…
Ann O'Regan says:
Love the personal references in these stories!
Ann O'Regan says:
Love the personally touch in these stories!
Welsh Ghosts of the Western Mail PART 1 | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] of corpse candles (a common feature of Welsh mythology…
Richard Freeman says:
It was Twycross Zoo not Dudley.
5 Haunted Places to Visit in Wexford | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Read more about the Enniscorthy Poltergeist here […]
Sneak Peek Review of Waking the Witch | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] has been generally overlooked, with the exception of a…
5 Unforgetable Ray Milland horrors | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Read full The Thing with Two Heads (1972) review…
5 Unforgetable Ray Milland horrors | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Read full The Premature Burial (1962) review here […]
Derek says:
Premature Burial is my favourite Roger Corman film - sure…
Simon says:
Alfie Bass was magnificent in this as the Jewish Vampire.
…
Jodie Smith says:
Fantastic article!
Simon Ball says:
I have to agree this is a much better film…
Simon Ball says:
Dennis Hoey plays Inspector Owen exactly the same way that…
More to Haunted Enfield than the Poltergeist | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] my previous article, Why I Believe in the Enfield…
Boris Karloff’s Thriller – Yours Truly, Jack The Ripper VIDEO | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Spooky Isles and London Haunts and Horrors will commemorate…
Mandy says:
There's a correlation in mines in Bolivia that ties in…
Bob says:
I think it is pretty obnoxious to require "liking" an…
Bernie Bell says:
I always baulk at the word 'ghost'.
I'm not even…
Richard says:
Must admit, this slipped off my radar when it was…
The Spooky Isles says:
I always think Friday the 13th is great because it…
Ann O'Regan says:
Gruesome indeed, but personally I have never had a problem…
Peter Jones says:
Hold your head high mate.
You keep telling them what…
Patricia K says:
What a horrible story!
lol
David says:
Never heard of this before.
Sounds interesting but it doesn't…
Tanya Hayes says:
I LOOOOOOVE Most Haunted and can't wait for them to…
Reggie says:
They can't write them like M.R. James anymore.
I used…
Dracula by Bram Stoker – Thoughts on Chapter 11 | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] from the book, the most famous case being the…
Spooky Diary (20 July to 26 July) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] 2004 Death of Jerry Composer behind films such as…
Spooky Diary (20 July to 26 July) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Death of Jerry Composer behind films such as The…
Spooky Diary (20 July to 26 July) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] 1968 The Devil Rides Out was released theatrically in UK.
…
Barb Drummond says:
There was always the dangers of runaway farm animals -…
Ghosts in the Landcape PART 1 | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] I began researching Children from the Sky, about the…
A Guide to Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] FILMED AS: Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire […]
Simon Ball says:
And don't forget his four outings as Alfred the butler…
Michael Gough, Spooky Star Profile | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] The Skull (1965) […]
Michael Gough, Spooky Star Profile | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Dracula (1958) […]
Barbara Lowe, Paranormal Investigator Q&A | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Barbara has provided us with a lengthy tale of…
Spooky Diary (6 July to 12 July) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] 1984 Lightning strikes York Minster.
Today I’m off to…
Spooky Diary (29 June to 5 July) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] 1927 Birth of Ken Russell, director of The Devils (1971)…
Spooky Diary (29 June to 5 July) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] 1997 Harry Potter and the Philosopher’s Stone published.
Written…
Most Haunted: The Galleries of Justice REVIEW | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Read Spooky Isles’ visit to The Galleries of Justice…
The 1895 “Witch-Burning” of Bridget Cleary | Mysterious Times says:
[…] read more  The 1895 “Witch-Burning” of Bridget Cleary |…
Gayle Cormie says:
It is very intresting
Arthur, King of the Dead | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] you’d prefer a British scholar, Walter Map shows how…
Robyn O'Neill says:
I said hello to an old woman on a stool…
Truth Seeker says:
And the best you can come up with is Farrant?
Whole lotta Vincent Price going on in London!
| The Spooky Isles says:
[…] The past couple of weeks or so, I have…
Veronica Carlson, Spooky Star Profile | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Frankenstein Must Be Destroyed (1969) […]
October’s Horror Movie Month!
| The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Horror Films […]
lynn says:
I've got this DVD n have to say its fab…
Spooky Diary (29 June to 5 July) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] 2005 The Descent, directed by Neil Marshal, released.
Read…
Blood and Bones in Vampiric London | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] other news, I’ve been busy preparing and upgrading my…
Aleister Crowley Secret Agent Pt 1: Birth of a Satanic Spy | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Our series on Aleister Crowley Agent 666 continues here.
…
Horror of Frankenstein (1970) REVIEW | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] by the end of the 1960s Hammer had churned…
Peter Gomes says:
Ghost stories are a part of the human life.
It…
Vincent Price and the Theatre of Blood: Kensal Green Cemetery Connection | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Ever fancied visiting the real-life London locations used Vincent…
Zombies from History BOOK REVIEW | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Geoff Holder points out that as not all the…
The Paranormal Life of Samuel Pepys | Mysterious Times says:
[…] read more The Paranormal Life of Samuel Pepys |…
14 Hammer Horror actors who appeared in James B..
.
says:
[…] Hammer Horror and James Bond were a staple of…
Edinburgh On A Budget – Top Must-Sees Without Entrance Fees says:
[…] fabled stories of those who died (and almost died)…
Joanne says:
I was told I was born with a double veil…
Bridget Cleary, Waking the Witch film director interview | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] by the infamous murder of Bridget Cleary and the…
Spooky Diary, Week (15 June to 21 June) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] He gave us classic gothic horror in glorious Technicolor,…
Spooky Diary (8 June to 14 June) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Birth of Samuel Z. Arkoff, American film producer of British…
Sneak Peak Review of Waking the Witch | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Read interview with Neil O’Driscoll about Waking the Witch…
geoff says:
The site now has 85 videos and is FREE to…
First look at poster for Emily Booth’s new Selkie film | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] News of the world premiere screening is coming soon,…
Spooky Diary, Week (15th June to 21st June) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] on this day in Twickenham.
He gave us classic…
Spooky Diary, Week (15th June to 21st June) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Watch a Terence Fisher fim: Commemorate the death of…
Vampire of the Villas Victim Choked on Garlic | Mysterious Times says:
[…] read more Vampire of the Villas Victim Choked on…
Anthony Lewis, Lost Valley of London, Spooky Twitter Talk | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Company of Wolves would be my favourite cinematic treatment…
The Spooky Isles says:
Thanks Warren, we look forward to getting you on at…
Warren Coates says:
Great stuff David loved it, and what a great way…
Halloween Special 2013 2-2 | Chonilla | Hosted by Interracial Sweethearts CHO & NILLA says:
[…] Youngsters lured into the world of Satan by Halloween.
The…
The Spooky Isles says:
You should contact Warren at http://www.nipra.co.uk/ directly for that information.
…
Ann Marie says:
Hi do y have any ghost hunts in belfast between…
Spooky Diary (June 8 to June 14) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] Visit Naseby, Northamptonshire where a phantom solider was photographed 363 years…
Spooky Diary (June 8 to June 14) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] 1926 Birth of Lionel Jeffries, who as an actor…
Spooky Diary (June 8 to June 14) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] With the anniversary of the gory execution of Richard Le…
The Peter Cushing Centennial Blogathon : Day Six | Blog says:
[…] winning Boris Karloff: More Than a Monster, an exactingly…
Franklin says:
Excellent, who would have thought the Goodies made a horror…
Goths In The Sun | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] here.
Sadly around a week or so after filming…
Spooky Diary (1st June to 7th June) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] The Omen, the British horror about the anti-christ Damien,…
Spooky Diary (1st June to 7th June) | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] City of Caves, Nottingham ‘Spirit of the Cave’, guided…
The Road to Transylvania begins here | The Spooky Isles says:
[…] English lawyer, Jonathon Harker, writes that he’s just left…
Graham Webster says:
My personal favourite Frankenstein film is The Bride of Frankenstein…
Mary Simons says:
I think for me it has to be 1931 Franenstein…
Oliver Craig says:
When a party off six or ten hill walkers actually…
sinead says:
i think that i should tell use more info becasuse…
zeinab says:
you people have he same info of the other websites…
Sharon Hutchinson says:
Yes, very good news indeed!
Here in the States it…
Craig says:
Wow!
You've chosen the 5 most clichéd spots in Derby.
…
elextra says:
amazing
Anna Magee says:
What a ride!
This is great news, and thanks to…
Laura says:
"It is now, a bustling, contemporary, metropolitan city.
It is…
kinnon says:
Up until the second world war, young males generally left…
Amy morgan says:
this is a very intresting story , i have experianced…
Angi says:
I come from Nottinghamshire in the uk and was always…
brian says:
fascinating info thanks.
On Kindle/Amazon might interest you: On the…
Shirley says:
@Robert - I'm sorry I have only just seen this…
John Davies says:
Until I moved away(oddly enough in 1993)I lived on the…
Cary Roberts says:
Hello there.
I am 22years old.
I am a caulbearer…
carrie says:
My granddaughter was born with a caul like to know…
Brunowski says:
Just been looking to see if any of these cards…
Kaitlin says:
I've heard a butler approached the grey lady and asked…
Gary Gerani says:
Glad you enjoyed the cards!
I not only wrote, photo-edited…
lennon says:
cool
Brock says:
Is it open to any country?
Lady Who Walks says:
Hello Iam a Caulbearer and so is my daughter.
I…
Eldergothfather says:
Sorry posted to wrong website, there was another version posted…
Eldergothfather says:
PLEASE correct the name: It's "A Christmas Carol", NOT 'Scrooge'....please...
scott clark says:
My auntie worked in western infirmary and has explained this…
fiona says:
It worked really well for me (and I agree that…
Josué Ferreira says:
This is just perfect.
John says:
Is any country free to enter?
mark says:
thank you, great info, awesome.
Helen Smith says:
Cannot wait for this!
Hubby & me are huge Hammer…
[email protected]
says:
Hammer were always the classic horror movie house when I…
Helen Thurston says:
Shall definitely have to see this when it's at my…
Mary-Ann Pollard says:
ohh this sounds really interesting!
love the women in black…
Joanna Smith says:
I am in a paranormal group and we travel all…
IRENE BOLTON says:
like the very atmospheric pic of Cave hill, rather spooky!
Nosferatus Pea Coat says:
What an awesome little blog this is!
I love this…
Paul Bell says:
I like the Scousers - full of rogues but likeable…
Mike says:
I agree about the silent boom of audiobooks.
It's awesome…
Amy Williams says:
I love all things paranormal :)
Peter Marcus says:
Wymering Manor Trust, who took over the manor in January…
Rebecca Fakir says:
I'm glad I didn't know about this when I lived…
Rebecca Duffy says:
Watched creep the other day, was really gory and the…
Kerry Dobson says:
Crikey, I'm biting my nails already just reading about Ghosts…
Veronica Still says:
Ireland’s Púca – a fearsome shape-shifter never heard of it…
Matt Forster says:
The lights flicker out on the carriages when ghosts pass…
Christina Scholz says:
Too bad I missed the live streaming!
Christina Scholz says:
I love shapeshifters from myths and folklore.
This may be…
Christina Scholz says:
I must put these on my list of places to…
Lou says:
I love stuff like this - which I why I…
Tom Atkinson says:
The Underground can be very spooky, particularly first thing in…
Dan says:
Interesting article, although after undertaking some preliminary research on this…
Paul Williams says:
I used to work for a security firm at Bletchley…
Dennis Ganzer says:
You left out, in my opinion, one of Karloff's best…
Lola Heide says:
Bien j'étudie ca en anglais!!
Captain Doomsday says:
Sounds awesome!
I have shared it out on Twitter and…
Richard chown says:
Great story you have shared.
Two times i'v visited the…
Hannah says:
"I’ve had metal ripped out of the wall and thrown…
Jonny says:
I went to the jail for a tour.
On that…
MoreThanHorror says:
Your not the only one.
Do worry, your not crazy.
…
Countess mongolia says:
I know you must do lots of these kind of…
Harnish says:
Hi, First of all a real interesting article and enjoyed…
Richard Phillips-Jones says:
My mum saw this on its original release, at the…
Freaky Folk Tales says:
Absolutely!
Tine Hreno says:
Brilliant analysis!
Currently working on a novel about what inspired…
Allison says:
Your website has a slight error - It states that:…
Donna Griffin-Balfour says:
I am so interested in being able to Ghost Hunt…
Chris D says:
I'm pretty sure the phrase is 'battered butterfly' and it…
Chris D says:
Paul Roland also wrote a song called "Werewolves of London"
Des Orpin says:
I was stationed at RAF Hereford as an apprentice in…
Maureen Mara says:
Wow, well done what an achievement.
Have so much respect…
thefemaleboss2013 says:
when me and my family went to dudley castle a…
Wirral Writer says:
Wow, this is excellent news!
I can't wait for Mark's…
Robert Wood says:
Just Like Shirley Johnson, I lived on the estate in…
Tina says:
I've seen Zinda Lash (I particularly loved Mina's dance) know…
Kinga Stinton says:
Pretty awesome stuff, I never knew until recently that there…
Vampire says:
Dracula Father and Son is the adaptation of the book…
Carolyn says:
My husband and I visited Chingle Hall in 1996 and…
elaine kinsella says:
Have couple of interesting pictures I took in charlivile and…
Mrs Gail J Gray says:
I am also a Peter Cushing fan, i think with…
Sam Perrin says:
I've been a guide at Highgate for ten years and…
Marcel lefaucheur says:
I was wondering if there was a Caul Bearers Symbol,…
geoff savage says:
hi my girlfriend is interested in going ghosthunting but isnt…
isaac lehane says:
seriously?
headless cross is on this list?
children of the…
Stan Shaw says:
As a very young boy I used to be madly…
dale says:
fab
Karen says:
Here's the official report on the archeology of the body.
…
Brian Gregory says:
I saw this last year at a screening and was…
Alex Davies says:
Hello David, I was wondering if you or anyone has…
Rosina says:
I've always been interested in this house...without knowing quite why.
…
Paul Hodge says:
I watched this marvellously scary portmanteau with my father in…
Paul Hodge says:
Ah, the perennial Bates!
The custard filling in the Hammer…
Paul Hodge says:
I cannot wait for this!
Coincidentally, only last month I…
Rea says:
My son was born completely in his waters, he is…
Joe McNally says:
The whole 'Thames angel' thing was some sort of viral…
Karen says:
I'm not sure why you think that the dog in…
Paul Hodge says:
Great article!
I remember the great ghost-hunter Andrew Green saying…
Paul Hodge says:
This was a thoroughly engaging article simply because I, too,…
Sarah Carolan says:
Looks a bit like something off of that Ghost Capture…
Paul Hodge says:
Marvellous stuff!
How can one actress be in so many…
Lorrie says:
Great site, I love the look of it.
The Dolphin…
Karen says:
I\'m glad you did the background search on the pub.
…
Hayley Flynn says:
Photos of inside Albert Hall and more information about the…
Craig Edwards says:
A warm and heartfelt remembrance.
Thank you for the memories.
…
Joe Thompson says:
Stephen: That was a touching tribute.
I first learned about…
Ryan says:
Another haunted lift, doing the same things, in Wales -…
Joe Thompson says:
Great stuff, David.
As a moustached man myself, I appreciate…
Joe Thompson says:
David -- This is fascinating stuff.
Postage stamps are a…
Patricia Nolan-Hall (Caftan Woman) says:
I do hope you can find the article to share…
Bob Cash says:
Just to record the most important fact, ANYONE claiming to…
Joe Thompson says:
David: Thank you for telling us about your experience on…
Conor says:
Bela Lugosi.
While Christopher Lee was good, Bela will always…
Mikael Nilsson says:
Not Jackman's fault the movie sucked, I think.
Either way,…
Amanda Pike says:
Ugh, they lose points for mentioning Hugh Jackman as if…
Reginald Potter says:
I love gargoyles, they should be compulsary on all new-builds!
…
alys raven says:
Throughout man's time on Earth, funerary practices have been carried…
Alan Toner, Wirral Writer says:
Love the Hammer Karnstein vampire trilogy.
Watched The Vampire Lovers…
Andy says:
Utter crap !
Having spent hundreds of hours walking and…
Punk says:
Very, very difficult to pick between the two for the…
Shannon Lee Wolf says:
Hi James, I just came across your site -- congratulations…
Cayla says:
I'm doing a report on Bedlam for English.
I'm just…
Kryptos973281 says:
If read or played by Sir Christopher Lee, both of…
Turkish Cult says:
Hi, we have put your review on our page by…
Jamie says:
Good ghost stories.
I hadn't heard of them before.
Sarah says:
Jorrocks doesn't play David Guetta style music.
Also, the old…
Bill Lindsay says:
The Bones of Jack is about Springheeled Jack.
Two Englishmen…
Bart Stewart says:
Just discovered you on Twitter, stopped by the site, and…
Kryptos973281 says:
I\'ll have to say Sir Christopher Lee (without whom I…
Martyn Robinson says:
Tales of the grey lady have been passed on and…
Horror Movie Medication says:
Nice review.
Quite thorough.
Personally, I kinda love and hate…
Freaky Folk Tales says:
A fascinating and insightful article.
It's revved up a desire…
Freaky Folk Tales says:
Ah, Thatcher the megalithic stone snatcher!
Great article, Paul
Karen says:
Sorry to burst a long standing and popular bubble but…
Rhonda Dorin says:
Loved this movie so much.
After all, its the greatest…
Dom Cooper says:
Hi both, Bob Pegg has already featured in my article…
Karen says:
No Warren Zevon?
No 'Werewolves of London'?
Srsly??!!
Karen says:
Could we get a bit of clarification?
Under 'George on…
Kai Roberts says:
No mention for The Werewolf of Old Chapeltown by Bob…
David Saunderson says:
I'm afraid it appears that it is no longer open…
Janine says:
Hi, is chingle hall still open to visits?
Carl says:
Lugosi's Dracula plays to the Victorian notion of the vampire…
simon littlejohns says:
my favourite episode of the antholgy series and along with…
HauntedRooms says:
Hi Jeanne, Thank you for stopping by and reading the…
Dons says:
I loved these!
My mum used to buy me these,even…
Feed The Zombie Children says:
Creepy stuff and a great article!
I'd never heard of…
Kryptos973281 says:
Funny movie indeed, skelton clothes, ftw.
(Except that a similar…
Jeanne says:
I love therich history of Scotland and the manyhauntings.itistruely amystriouscountry,…
Eric M says:
FYI - your video link is down (& looks like…
Lilian C Moraes says:
When Obi-Wan tells you to do something, just do it!
Lilian C Moraes says:
I saw, years ago, an interview with Sir Alec Guinness,…
David Saunderson says:
Don't know it but I possibly did see it -…
Mischa says:
In that case, that's one you reminded me of... Perhaps…
David Saunderson says:
I'm not sure if it has that in the film.
…
Mischa says:
Does it contain scenes with a clock and a door…
Jack The Ripper UK says:
I heard about this version.
And people liked alot this…
Hope says:
Very helpful with my homework, I am very grateful with…
Angela Englert says:
Lee's films were better, but Lugosi was definitive and pretty…
amanda says:
I absolutely go with Bela Lugosi.Christopher Lee was good but…
TonyS says:
I agree in the main.
Bela Lugosi is the better…
Rosemary A Smith says:
I hope Sarah's trilogy is as much a success as…
dane says:
Hi.
I great blog!
I live abou a 6min drive…
Randrox says:
Excellent writing, Ren.
Very interesting review.
Randrox says:
I love AWIL, too, and watch it every time it…
ljclayton says:
What a wonderful blog.
Doug Lamoreux says:
Well, one zombie - maybe - but what the heck.
…
astrovasekaran says:
Astrology is not an illusion but a specific branch of…
Sarah Carolan says:
I loved it.
Very reminiscent of Oh Whistle & I'll…
Alys says:
Bit late for that, really, isn't it, if you consider…
Pensador Louco says:
This is a perfect film, simply fantastic.
Mandy Steel Collins says:
Curiously enough, most of the graveyards I've been to in…
Pensador Louco says:
Great review.
Made me want again to watch this truly…
sandy says:
This is my absolute favorite version of "Scrooge".
Alistair Sim…
Pensador Louco says:
Thanks for the review.
I was thinking about watching this…
Duncan Lunan says:
Thanks for the references, but I need to put a…
Sarah Carolan says:
The Necropolis Railway has fascinated me for a long time…
Jon Kaneko-James says:
I've always loved the idea of getting together at Christmas…
robin says:
i always find the site easy the use and give…
David Saunderson says:
Have another go, I've changed the link
David Saunderson says:
Have another go - I have changed the link :)
Bev says:
Tried to download free edition.
USAmazon charges 99 cents -…
Sheila Smith says:
Hello, I clicked on the link for the US Amazon…
Sarah Carolan says:
The article says he will be joined by models from…
selina says:
Feaked me out first seen it about 1979 as a…
selina says:
So true wish the bbc would bring back those days…
candy says:
Totally cool post.
I've always been fascinated by the images…
Richard Moody says:
Ghost boxes work by what is known as sweeping of…
Kevin Gates says:
Interesting article.
I've explored the events of 1963 to 1975…
Leroy McKane says:
This was all really interesting but I don't think I…
Bill says:
And I walked round the churchyard a while ago and…
Radu Ştefan RS says:
Great movie!
Anthony Hopkins, Keanu Reeves, Winona Ryder, Gary Oldman...…
says:
I need to re-visit this one!
Thanks!
says:
One of my favorite Hammer films!
Good review.
I love…
Barbara Green says:
There was not an acrimonious campaign by the YRHS with…
Paul Synnott says:
Great article on the Ripper's victims.
Thanks.
Maureen Hilton says:
Very Interesting, I have been interested in the the Whitechapel…
Nicola Haselden says:
Soon be Halloween.
Jeff Mclucas says:
Sounds really interesting.
Love it
Emily 'Inertia Creeps' Davis says:
I will be having it in my will (when I…
says:
Thanks for the reminder!
Sarah Parker says:
My guide group stayed at Broneirion and though we did…
Euan B. Knudsen says:
Such a chaos of emotions - a fave Hammer of…
The Dark Republic says:
Good article!
Ian Hall says:
Oh, yes.
And there's also the matter of Jerry Goldsmith's…
Richard Simon Holland says:
This review pains me.In my opinion 'The Mummy' is one…
Samantha Sweeting says:
Wonder if Luke Campbell fancies a night ghostbusting 'monks' on…
Mike Covell says:
The House in Hull was rented by the O'Grady family…
Nicola Seathreepeeo Carpenter says:
Hi Emily.
Thank you so much for your kind comments.
…
Emily Hill says:
Nicola, I am so thrilled to make your (albeit) on-line…
Jessica Bergie Clark says:
Bela Lugosi will ALWAYS be my one and only bat…
Iain Harrison says:
Sounds excellent, although reminiscent of Kill List (and the non-horror…
Peter Townsend says:
For readers wanting further information the link for the American…
Candy Korman says:
Spooky Isles has done it again.
Great list.
Makes me…
Lucia Bovio says:
thankyou
Alessandra Di Amaro says:
♥ hey lucia happy birthday for your 21 ♥
Candy Korman says:
Fabulous!
Peter Townsend says:
Thanks for the information.
The American Museum of Photography also…
Beneath Thy Feet says:
Interesting, poor Rumwold.
Only three days old and talking but…
David Graham Scott says:
This documentary I made about an execution chamber in Glasgow…
Candy Korman says:
One of my all-time favorite spooky topics.
The Metropolitan Museun…
Tara Kala Wong says:
hahaha and i liked it!!
Sammi Parkyn says:
Haha this is soma Tara would like lol
Joe Martin says:
Maybe I should do that for my birthday since I…
Lucia Bovio says:
I am comming here for my birthday lofl.
Simon John Ball says:
Lee without a doubt.
Hev Ward-Jamieson says:
I'd love to go there and see it!
Jacquie Hodges says:
great story!
Daniel Feltimo says:
Any idea where he is buried?
says:
Hey thanks guys!
Just realized this got posted.
Glad you…
Analise Santiago says:
Wow, crazy but interesting article!
says:
Classic.
Book of Lists featured Brides under category 'Best Use…
Fiona-Jane Brown says:
Forget the critics - this is good folklore, and without…
Emma Hales says:
the world never changes, still the same crap happening today…
Fiona-Jane Brown says:
Think the murder of Fanny Adams was far more brutal.
…
Emma Dowdall says:
I'm terrified of monks but this story was really good...…
Megan Wood Jervis says:
It's a horrible film.
I would rather poke my own…
Carlyn Strydom says:
I will still watch the film, but at least now…
Martine Monksfield says:
I work there.... Really must visit it at some point!!
…
Deborah Cochrane says:
I visited the Eastern part of Highgate a couple of…
Drew Cooke says:
eh, what crap.
would be a great article if you…
Beneath Thy Feet says:
What a fantastic article and superb photographs.
One cemetery I…
David Saunderson says:
Elliot - there's plenty of mentions on the net if…
Elliot Davies says:
Fascinating article.
What are your sources?
I ask not because…
David Saunderson says:
Hi, I am sure if you contact Tom at http://www.herefordparanormal.com…
Zoe Cox says:
when your next hunt in hereford?
can I come please.
Robert James McManus says:
I have a blog on the Pendle Witches on my…
Stephen Alexander Doyle says:
I would say Whales most ambitious creation, an outstanding collection…
Irene Pope says:
yeh i do believe he is rose i know he…
Brian Lynch says:
nice
Maya Panika says:
This sounds familiar!
In the house where I grew up…
Dennis Vest says:
Great film!
I have it on DVD and though I've…
Rose Turner says:
i wonder if moggie is still on the site of…
Irene Pope says:
I am so fascinated with anything to do with ghosts…
Geoff Huijer says:
Looking VERY good....
Suzzie Bray says:
awesome,,,,
TwistedLittle Chic says:
Love it <3
Jason Rowland says:
Beautifully written... well done, Solomon!
Julie McNamee says:
Did you know there's aa annual Near Death Experience festival…
Greg Kirkpatrick says:
The Kindle versions of his ghost stories are free as…
Fiona-Jane Brown says:
Eew!
Must be where the Scots expression "Gettin' yer heid…
Alyson Andrew says:
I thought this was an excellent and even-handed review.
I…
Michael Augustine Reed says:
Excellent Interview...Shane is Brilliant and happy to say I am…
CPR Computer Services says:
If the woman's ghost was first spotted in 1820 she…
Catherine Mackie says:
Thanks for telling us about them.
In your description they…
Greg Moodie says:
Sounds awesome.
Would love to read more.
David Saunderson says:
What is it that you say is incorrect?
Lee 'Spikey' Nethersole says:
what a terrible and utterly incorrect article!
Simon John Ball says:
Looks about a million times better than any US horror.
Alexander Covan says:
How did, "trust me, I'm a doctor" ever get any…
Alexander Covan says:
Makes you wonder how they ever got, "trust me, I'm…
Martha Stuart says:
So horrific it would have to be true!
Candy Korman says:
Cool and creepy tale of true terror!
Fiona-Jane Brown says:
Thanks for publishing the article, guys, this is only the…
Candy Korman says:
As a Mary Shelly fanatic, I'm enjoying the cogent retelling…
Citizen Screen says:
Agree with much of what you say.
But one major…
Donald Sepanek says:
Have the film, saw it, and agree with you 100%!
Vic Stack says:
St Dunstans (alleged) birthplace, a thatched hut in Baltonsborough, just…
Greg Kirkpatrick says:
It's just around the corner from the JMU union as…
Candy Korman says:
Wonderfully weird and creepy.
Heidi Patchett says:
Gary Oldman is the only redeeming feature of this film.
…
Chad Morelock says:
I've never understood the outstanding praise of Coppola's Dracula.
The…
Jaime Hood says:
One of my favorite horror movies, and one of the…
Kirsty MacLeod says:
James VI of Scotland is the same person as James…
Edward V'Kanty says:
I found this very interesting, especially as I know very…
Jess Sturman says:
Wow this sounds proper freaky!
Really liked the review and…
Jess Sturman says:
Oooooh some naked wall slapping!
Definitely worth a watch!
Absolutely…
Jess Sturman says:
Oooooh eerie or what!
Loved the review, you sold it…
Roger Koch says:
An excellent little thriller with one very effective jump scare…
Andy Boyd says:
creepily cool
Sheila Walsh says:
I think he has the most amazing voice.
It sends…
Marilyn Burkman says:
Camden Toy of Buffy fame also celebrates a birthday this…
says:
Brilliant Horror period piece, Blood On Satan s Claw has…
Marie Thor says:
3...of the very best : )
Evan Knudsen says:
And Dracula was published today in 1897!
Evan Knudsen says:
And Dracula was published today in 1897!
David Stone-Haigh says:
Happy Birthday 'Uncle Peter'.
Thanks for all the wonderful memories.
…
Passerby says:
Don't forget the five Catholics martyred in Oxford, and the…
smudgeon says:
excellent primer here, must admit i've somehow overlooked slomo before…
SinisterPumpkin says:
Christopher Lee has always been my favorite Dracula, not taking…
Emily Chipper says:
I just can't choose between the two, both portray a…
Wendy says:
Christopher Lee is my favourite Dracula as well.
I am…
Kam says:
Farming babies in this fashion is a waste of time…
SinisterPumpkin says:
This was a great film, love the write up.
Great…
the rabbit says:
You can't carbon date stones or etchings!
Jim says:
Love driving down the A3 past Guildford and looking up…
Sarah Carolan says:
Another great read and brilliant piece of music.
I loved…
Sarah Carolan says:
That was a fascinating read.
I watched a documentary about…
dom says:
Further to my post, I have been contacted by Clive…
Alex French says:
An excellent review Anna, I missed most of this series…
lucy says:
I visited crickadarn in 2009 after a trip to the…
Wendy says:
This was a very interesting article.
I tend to agree…
says:
This is exactly the sort of thing the Serendipitists are…
Julian Karswell says:
There are examples of medical books bound in human skin…
Katya says:
Will forever be one of my favorite shows of all…
Gary William Murning says:
Hi Wendy—yes, I'd have to agree that, from an adult…
Wendy says:
Young minds are very impressionable, and little children pick up…
Jon says:
Born in 1969, I spent the formative part of my…
sucesos paranormales says:
I used to be recommended this blog by way of…
Steve Katriel says:
Fantastic writing, Ren, as always.
:)
Lucy says:
Where do I start?
You conjecture that this was part…
Spiro Dimolianis says:
Thanks for sharing this.
You may also like to read…
Grand Old Movies says:
This is pretty much the canonic Karloff best-of list; some…
David Saunderson says:
Thanks Barbara for your thoughts and experiences with Poltergeists -…
barbara lowe says:
interesting videos i do haunted house clearing have come cross…
tristaturtle says:
I grew up with an anime version of the little…
Ciaran says:
Nice little article there.
I'm not in hospitals much but…
Raliel says:
It is worth mentioning the interesting take that H.P.Lovecraft had…
Susan A says:
Wonderful film.
Scarred my youth with visions of crawling carnivorous…
MJ Wayland says:
Hi Gavin I am very sorry to say but I…
Morgan says:
Love the review of two of my favourite places in…
Real Queen of Horror says:
How eerie that sounds but I'd love to experience that!
…
Cindy says:
Wow Delin that's pretty informative!
Even today everything portray Rasputin…
John says:
Look pretty good for a production that only cost a…
Delin Colon says:
This film only chronicles the myths surrounding Rasputin.
In actuality,…
Soapy Suze says:
My fave 'Carry On' of all time!
A brilliantly witty…
Susan A says:
A good old fashioned monster flick.
The snake mask startled…
Phil Norris says:
I first saw this film back in the day when…
Violet says:
Hi Mel :) Yes, I know about the 1832 Act.
…
bullet says:
Excellent article.
One thing to also bear in mind is…
David Saunderson says:
Sarah, thanks for your comments about your experience on the…
Sarah Carolan says:
I actually did the City of the Dead ghost walk…
David Saunderson says:
Thanks Tony, that sounds like a good one and you…
Anthony Cowin says:
Another good one I remember and in fact bought on…
David Saunderson says:
Thanks Sarah.
Someone just told me on Twitter but good…
Sarah Carolan says:
Could the film be Out Of The Darkness from the…
Mel @ Wishing Moon says:
Wow, Barbara sounds like an incredible psychic medium - I…
Little Gothic Horrors says:
I only just watched this film during the past week.
…
Frankenstein 1931 says:
I have always been irritated by the murderer's brain plotline…
iZombie says:
HBA Welcome Wagon... Wanted to let you know, you part…
The Spooky Isles is dedicated to British and Irish horror and supernatural-related entertainment.
That includes ghost stories, horror movies, gruesome history, visits to haunted houses, ghost tours, exhibitions and all just about anything on these isles that can send a shiver down your spine.
Tag Cloud
Feature Film Reviews England Scotland Dracula Greater London Hammer Films Vampires Ireland 5 Haunted Places to Visit Regular Columns Jack the Ripper Videos Folklore Frankenstein Spooky News Occult Television Ghost Hunting Wales
Privacy Policy
Copyright © 2011-2016 Spooky Isles.
What do hands mean in cemeteries?
Poltergiest fears after film about family haunting