Apr
MAY
Jun
8
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
8 May 16 - 8 May 16
Close Help
About Cookies
We want you to enjoy your visit to our website.  That's why we use cookies to enhance your experience. By staying on our website you agree to our use of cookies.
More info about cookies.
Accept & close
Business Directory Local Info Dating Buy Sell Book an Ad
Search
Enter your search below:
Register | Sign In
@gazettenewsdesk
News, sport and entertainment from South lakeland, the Dales and North Lancashire
The Westmorland Gazette
News, sport and entertainment from South lakeland, the Dales and North Lancashire
Kendal 23.6°c
News Sport Leisure Video What's On Jobs Property Announcements Cars More
News Flood Heroes Battling back from the floods Keep Justice Local Cumbria North Lancs Dales Education Business
Register Sign In
Home News Sport Announcements Jobs Most popular UK news Send us your news Cars Traffic & travel Business Directory Property Dating Desktop site
REVEALED: The testimonies of 10 Pendle witches charged with murder
/ Tom Murphy , Reporter
Share:
THE voices of the Pendle witches will come alive and join a diverse line-up of Lancaster University’s upcoming Public Lectures.
Other lectures will cover Lancaster’s contribution to an important area of science, the changing face of the NHS and nuclear new build.
Charged with the murder of ten people through witchcraft in 1612, the women accused had their testimonies recorded by Thomas Potts, and these will be explored at the lecture. ‘Beyond the Lancashire Witches: Writing and Freedom’ will take place on November 27, opening with a dramatisation of the women’s testimonies filmed in the Witches’ Tower where they were imprisoned.
Lectures are all free, and are held either on Lancaster University Campus or in Lancaster City Centre.
For more information visit www.lancaster.ac.uk/50 or call 01524 592809.
Share:
Promoted stories
Most popular
See more stories
Most popular
See more stories
Comments are closed on this article.
Next Up
Mobile site
Contact Us
Subscribe
Photo Sales
Advertise
AdChoices
Archive
Topics
Announcements
Site Map
Exchange and Mart
Dating
Leap
Terms & Conditions
Contributor Terms
Cookie Policy
Privacy Policy
©Copyright 2001-2015
This site is part of Newsquest's audited local newspaper network | A Gannett Company
Newsquest (North West) Ltd, Loudwater Mill, Station Road, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. HP10 9TY |3102566| Registered in England & Wales
Ipsoregulated
This website and associated newspapers adhere to the Independent Press Standards Organisation's Editors' Code of Practice. If you have a complaint about the editorial content which relates to inaccuracy or intrusion, then please contact the editor here . If you are dissatisfied with the response provided you can contact IPSO here