JAN
APR
May
15
2013
2016
2017
4 captures
29 Nov 12 - 15 Apr 16
Close Help
TheHorse.com: Your Guide to Equine Health Care
Sign In
Register
Topics
News
Videos & Photos
Free Reports
Blogs
Free Horses
Tools
Podcasts
Newsletters
Magazine
Shop
Horse Protection Act
By Tim Cordes, DVM
Oct 15, 2001
Topics:
Horse Industry News
Print
Email
Favorite
Share
Tweet
Newsletters
The following information was provided by Tim Cordes, DVM, Senior Staff Veterinarian, USDA, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Veterinary Services.
The Horse Protection Act was put in place and is being modified in order to prevent the act of soring, whereby caustic chemicals, foreign materials, or mechanical devices are used on horses in order to enhance gait.
The following is the USDA's current plan for enforcing the Horse Protection Act to prevent soring of horses.
For further information on the Horse Protection Act, or to comment on regulations, contact Dr. John V. Zisk, Director, Horse Protection, Animal Care Staff, REAC, APHIS, USDA, 4700 River Road, Unit 84, Riverdale, MD 20737-1234; 301/734-7833.
Copies of the Strategic Plan are available through that office.
I. Mission Statement
The USDA seeks to enforce the Horse Protection Act and to continue to strengthen its relationship with the horse industry through a cooperative partnership and a comprehensive plan of "self-regulation."
In order to achieve the elimination of soring, this proposal requires acceptance of elementary principles and the elements contained within.
It is set forth with a programmed vision and expectation for the welfare of horses.
Without compromising Horse Protection Act regulations or USDA enforcement expertise, this proposal utilizes and incorporates historical enforcement perspective and forethought on evaluations, audits, and the utilization of research to develop innovative policies and regulations to assure the protection of horses.
II.
Statement Of Philosophy
The Congress of the United States and their constituencies have sought to eliminate the practice of soring through passage and execution of the Horse Protection Act (HPA).
Unquestionably, the welfare of horses has been and continues to be the primary concern of Animal Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) veterinarians responsible for the enforcement of the HPA.
APHIS believes that its role in enforcing the HPA should be specifically tailored toward the eventual elimination of soring.
To that end, APHIS now seeks to strengthen USDA certified horse industry organizations with a proactive regulatory program geared toward the curtailment of both blatant and inconspicuous methods of soring.
APHIS recognizes the challenges that such a proposal will place upon the program, however, it believes these can be overcome through a cooperative, non-partisan approach.
Just as APHIS veterinarians abide by their veterinary oath taken upon entry into their profession, we believe and have expectations that horse industry organizations should adhere to our standards of commitment, knowledge, and skill to relieve the suffering of sored horses.
The ideal strategy for the eventual elimination of soring would be the establishment of an effective program of self-regulation for USDA certified horse industry organizations.
Such a program would make the best use of available resources.
Self-regulation would have the added challenges of:
Minimizing conflicts of interest within and among various industry organizations.
Establishing an effective penalty system for offenders.
Strengthening of the horse industry and betterment of the affected breeds.
Providing educational programs to strengthen HPA enforcement and compliance.
Trained inspection professionals familiar with industry procedures and possessing proven inspection skills for the detection of sore horses are not just a requirement, but a necessity.
Detection methods must continuously advance, becoming increasingly more sophisticated as soring techniques change and take on new applications.
Continuous research on soring practices and the effects on horses is essential to achieving this goal.
III.
Rationale
1.
Enforcement History
The Horse Protection Act was passed by Congress in 1970, and Federal veterinarians began its enforcement by attending horse shows in 1972.
Despite over 20 years of government intervention and regulation, and an amendment to the Act to incorporate Designated Qualified Persons (DQPs), the practice of soring continues.
Enforcement statistics garnered from Congressional reports support USDA contentions that the time for adoption of the Horse Protection strategic work plan is now.
Recent DQP assessed violations when APHIS is not in attendance at a show/sale have approximated DQP assessed violations when APHIS is in attendance.
Although a discrepancy still exists with the number of issued DQP violations based on USDA presence, APHIS believes this "gap" can be further reduced through Horse Protection strategic plan adoption and implementation.
2.
Program Concerns
APHIS continues to support the elimination of soring practices and the work of DQPs to that end.
APHIS and industry inspectors have expressed similar discontent over Horse Protection items such as:
Scar rule enforcement inadequacies.
Inadequate penalty system for industry violators.
APHIS concern that the elimination of soring is not equally shared by all of industry.
Dissatisfaction with lack of exploration of alternative methods of evaluating/detecting soring through research.
3.
Public Concern/Special Interest Groups
A proactive, self-regulated enforcement plan is a tool successfully used by APHIS in other regulatory programs.
APHIS believes this approach for the Horse Protection program would capture the support of professional equine organizations and build an accurate and representative picture of enforcement and success in the public view.
4.
APHIS Vision And Program Review
The enforcement of the HPA through a self-regulatory work structure is consistent with the APHIS vision.
Team-based leadership between APHIS and the horse industry is the first step in achieving our mutual goal of eliminating the illegal practice of soring.
APHIS is cognizant of the tremendous public interest in the Horse Protection program and is committed to deliver services of the highest quality.
APHIS can accomplish this goal through a process of open communication, continual program evaluation, responsiveness to changing times, and strong proactive leadership.
We welcome the challenges that lie ahead as we focus on continued achievements and advancements in Horse Protection.
IV.
Self-Regulatory Enforcement Plan
1.
Partnership In Enforcement Of The Horse Protection Act
Through the cooperative concept of self-regulation, USDA certified horse industry organizations would enter into an enforcement partnership with APHIS.
Enforcement (through inspection efforts) of the Horse Protection program would be placed primarily upon the horse industry DQP systems.
APHIS would not relinquish its authority under the Act of regulations, but seek to empower the industry through advisory, audit, and consultant roles.
Horse industry organizations would be held accountable for the action of their DQP inspection programs.
USDA certification would be contingent, in part, upon the satisfactory fulfillment of DQP program operations.
Measurable performance standards for horse industry organizations and APHIS would be developed and continually reviewed to ensure accuracy and reliability.
Communication between APHIS program managers and horse industry representatives would be formalized through specified meetings, direct involvement of APHIS regional offices with industry representatives, strategic planning committee workshops with industry personnel, and specialized training for industry organizations.
2.
USDA Oversight Of Industry Staff
a. Certify horse industry organizations.
b. Decertify horse industry organizations.
c. Review and approve industry rule books.
d. Organize public meetings with industry representation.
e. Initiate and review program projects, work plans, policy, and regulatory initiatives.
Regions
a. Assign Horse Protection inspection teams to shows.
b. Receive reports/data generated by DQPs.
c. Act on reports of noncompliance and issue letters of reprimand (i.e., Letters of Caution/Warning).
d. Communicate directly with industry representatives in areas involving training, daily operations, dispute resolution, and regional requests by industry officials.
APHIS Veterinarians
a. Audit industry records.
b. Participate and execute training courses in their region.
c. Observe and evaluate DQPs in the performance of their duties.
d. Inspect horses and document Federal cases when necessary.
3.
Horse Industry Organizations' Responsibilities
a. Formulate rule books and submit them for APHIS approval.
Phase I: Submit for approval after
adoption of the StrategicPlan.
Phase II: Submit for approval after any
industry changes.
Phase III: Submit for approval when
requested by APHIS.
b. Enforce standards of conduct for DQPs and industry officers.
c. Issue DQP licenses to qualified candidates and provide uniform and consistent training.
d. Submit show schedules and DQP assignments to APHIS regional offices in a timely manner.
e. Make records available for APHIS audits.
f. Evaluate individual DQP performances and take appropriate administrative action as necessary.
V. USDA Certification Of The Horse Industry
Horse industry organizations (HIO) certified by the USDA would receive either a full, probationary, or decertification level determined by APHIS audits and evaluations.
The following three factors would be utilized to establish certification status:
Industry self-sanctions (on DQPs, members, etc.) must be consistent with APHIS standards.
Industry must effectively address DQP conflicts of interest and obvious discrepancies or ticketing rates with and without APHIS presence.
Industry must remove its officers from office if given a ticket.
Full certification of the industry program would be granted if all three criteria were met upon auditing.
Probationary certification would be for industries which have not met the three criteria.
The maximum period of time that an organization can be placed on probation status is limited to one year.
Based upon subsequent audits and review, an industry placed on probation can become fully certified once it meets all criteria.
APHIS auditing teams will have discretion when recommending certification status.
Headquarters, with Regional offices recommendations, will provide final certification status decisions.
Probationary and decertified industries would be subject to increased scrutiny by APHIS.
VI.
Uniform Rules, Regulations, And Sanctions
A credible and efficacious penalty system remains at the cornerstone of this proposal for self-regulation.
Unless suspension standards levied by horse industry organizations become commensurate with APHIS, the adoption of a self-regulation plan would be compromised.
The following penalty recommendations/procedures are proposed:
Letters of reprimand will be requested by the APHIS inspection team.
At the time a reprimand is requested by the APHIS inspection team, the DQP in question will be informed at the end of the show/sale with a notification ticket.
Requested letters of reprimand will then be forwarded to the APHIS Regional Office for approval and subsequently forwarded to the DQP program director.
After receiving a second letter of reprimand within a two-year period, the DQP's license will be suspended for a period of three years.
If after three years a DQP returns from suspension and receives a third letter of reprimand, his/her license is subjected to lifetime revocation.
Actions taken against poorly performing DQP(s) by their Organization:
Suspensions.
License Revocation.
After receiving a letter of reprimand that DQP must apprentice under a USDA inspection team for a minimum of two shows/sales.
The industry hearing committee for DQP performance must notify the APHIS Regional Office before the hearing so that an APHIS representative may be present if desired.
Actions taken against industry for poor DQP performance include:
Fines.
Revocation/suspension of horse industry organization certification based on:
chronic inaction/noncompliance to
correct the DQP(s).
fraudulent bookkeeping.
Actions taken against unaffiliated shows include:
Use of current administrative hearing process against show management/ exhibitor/trainer.
USDA personnel will continue to work both affiliated and unaffiliated shows for the 1996 show season.
If and when horse industry organization self-regulation successfully demonstrates effectiveness, USDA emphasis will be shifted more to unaffiliated shows.
Designated Qualified Persons System Proposal
The following violation categories represent the majority of infractions committed by industry participants.
As a major component of the self-regulatory work plan, APHIS believes these penalty levels should be adopted by industry.
Penalty Categories Followed By Penalty
Bilateral Soreness (including Scar Rule and Bad Image)--one year disqualification, $1,000 fine.
Unilateral Soreness--six-month disqualification, $500 fine.
Bilateral/Unilateral open lesions--six- month disqualification.
Foreign Substance--disqualification from the show.
Technical Violations (i.e., shoeing)--disqualification from that class.
Bilateral/Unilateral aversion to palpation--disqualification from the show.
This is not a comprehensive list and only represents first-time violators.
Repetitive violators would be levied more severe penalties.
Post-show violators would not only be assessed appropriate penalties, but also would forfeit trophies, prizes, or class/category point awards.
In the event that more than one violation is assessed, all penalties would be applied and suspensions cumulatively served.
Sore horses would be equally suspended from competition/exhibition for the duration of the penalty served by the trainer/owner.
VII.
Training
Proper training of all participants in Horse Protection is essential.
Training must contain certain elements and be applicable, informative, and uniform so that all USDA certified horse industry organization participants maintain consistency and accountability in their performance under a self-regulatory enforcement plan.
Two primary groups of participants require training: Designated Qualified Persons (DQPs) and APHIS veterinarians.
APHIS and industry training programs will focus on the following three areas:
Training schedule timetables.
Training formats.
Training program development and implementation.
With an effective training program, performance and measurement standards can be developed and analyzed throughout the administration of the program.
The initial development of an enforcement partnership in Horse Protection will begin with training.
In order to provide specialized training to USDA certified horse industries, APHIS will regionalize the scheduling of training sessions.
All enforcement stakeholders will have the opportunity to participate in agenda proceedings and presentations.
APHIS will follow this training with the adoption of yearly education seminars that will be available to all horse industry constituencies.
VIII.
Research Proposal
Under this strategic work plan, research would receive immediate attention on the part of APHIS and industry in a cooperative agreement.
Areas of potential study include:
Thermography and other methods to detect soring.
Pathological/physiological effects of soring upon horses.
Shoeing techniques and associated changes in the form/function of the foot.
APHIS currently has the opportunity to engage in scientific research through a number of academic settings.
Interest on the part of the research community has been expressed, and concurrent investigations are underway at several universities.
APHIS veterinarians believe research is the most important element in this self-regulatory proposal.
Measurement standards for the Horse Protection program can be defined, established, and authenticated with the assistance of the medical/research community.
Resources for research would be taken from annual appropriations to the Horse Protection program and potential solicitation from horse industry groups.
About the Author
Tim Cordes, DVM
Tim Cordes, DVM, is the Senior Staff Veterinarian for Equine Programs at Veterinary Services of APHIS (Animal and Plant Health Inspection Services).
Stay on top of the most recent Horse Health news with FREE weekly newsletters from TheHorse.com.
Learn More
Free Newsletters
Sign up for the latest in:
Horse Health
Nutrition
Soundness & Lameness
In-Depth
Welfare & Industry News
Farm & Barn
Breeding
Older Horse Care
Sports Medicine
Vet & Professional
Equine Behavior
Reader Favorites
Important Messages from TheHorse.com
From our partners
Bluegrass Equine Digest
TheHorse.com Partner Emails
Email
Related Content
Article
The Horse, TheHorse.com Win Media Awards
Article
Diagnosing Equine Ataxia: Go Back to Basics
Article
Equine Collapse: Once in a Lifetime?
Article
2010: A Year in Review
Article
Merry Christmas from The Horse
Article
New Jersey Beefs Up Horse Health Regulations Enforcement
Article
Improve Digestion to Prevent Intestinal Upset in Sport Horses
Article
Bill Would Establish Corolla Wild Horse Population Level
Article
Consider Stall Space When Shipping Overseas
Article
Checking the Vitals: Abdominal Sounds
Prev Next
POLL: Slow Feeders
Have you ever used the following types of slow feeders?
(Select all that apply.)
Tell us about your experiences!
Slow feeding trough with metal grate
Barrel-style slow feeder
Slow feeding “pillow”
Haynet
Other (please explain)
I’ve never used a slow feeder for my horse.
Comments.
100 Characters Max
View Results
Horse Care
How to care for the basic health needs of horses
Diseases and Conditions
Horse-health-problem risk factors, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment
Nutrition
Proper feeding practices for foals, adult horses, and older horses
Lameness
Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of leg lameness
Hoof Care
Prevention and treatment for problems of the equine foot
Farm and Barn
Design and maintain a healthy horse operation
Breeding and Reproduction
Horse breeding from planning through foal care
Vet and Professional
News and issues for equine health professionals
Sports Medicine
All aspects of caring for performance horses
Welfare and Industry
Discussions about the welfare of our equine friends
Topics A-Z
Recent News
What Smells do Stallions Find Sexy?
Study stallions bred quickest if they had the scent of urine from mares in heat on their nostrils.
Read More
Monmouth Park Announces New Health Protocols For Shippers
Meeting for Fish Springs Wild Horse Pilot Program Scheduled
Lecture on Robotics-Controlled Imaging System Scheduled
The Equitwister: A Simplified Way to Castrate Working Equids
EEE Confirmed in Unvaccinated Florida Horse
Do Equine Genetics Influence Behavior?
When Nature Meets Science: Breeding with Frozen Semen
Registration Open for KHC Large Animal Rescue Training
View More
Event Coverage
AAEP Convention 2015
Las Vegas, Nevada
WEVA Congress 2015
Guadalajara, Mexico
ISES 2015
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Videos
News/Interviews
Seminars
Vet Procedures
Featured Series
How-To
Webcasts
Products
5 Things You Need to Know
Slideshows
Infographics
How-To
Consider Native Plants in Horse Property Landscaping
Seminars
Navicular Disease
Slideshow
Shelter Options for Horses
Free Reports
Fact Sheets
Quick references of horse conditions, diseases & health topics
Special Reports
In-depth reports on many aspects of horse health care
Convention Reports
Detailed summaries of conventions and seminars on horse health
Forms
Featured Free Reports
Special Report
12 Facts about Equine Navicular Syndrome
Special Report
Just the Basics: What Every Horse Needs
Special Report
15 Facts About Breeding Sport Horses
Blogs
Across the Fence
At Home with Horses
Horse Sense (and Sensibility)
Horses and the Law
Old Horses: Better With Age
Smart Horse Keeping
The Horse 911: What's Your Emergency?
The Winning Edge
Trail Riding with The Horse
Weird Horse News
Commentary
Equine Behavior
Horse Nutrition
Featured Blogs
Horse Sense (and Sensibility)
For Want of an Curbed Appetite
Old Horses: Better With Age
Lines of Communication
Old Horses: Better With Age
Trudging Through Winter
Adopt a Horse
Browse horses that are FREE to a good home.
All Breeds
Thoroughbreds
Standardbreds
List Your Horse
Add your FREE horse to our list of adoptable horses.
List Your Horse
Horses that Found a Home
Adoption Resources
Learn more about adoption, whether you’re adopting a horse or giving a horse away.
Featured Adoptable Horse
large riding pony free to a good home
Dusty Rose
Dusty is estimated to be 12-15 yrs old and loves people.
She has been used for trail riding, is not spooky at all, will lead or follow.
Solid build, round barrel so takes up an adult leg just fine.
Quite forward without being pushy so works of ... Read More
Farm Call: Your Questions Answered
Q&As about caring for your horse
Event Calendar
Find upcoming horse health educational events
Glossary
Look up the meaning of horse health terms
TheHorse.com en Español
Articulos en Español (Articles in Spanish)
Normal Vital Signs
Healthy temperature, heart, & respiration rates
Weight Calculator
Estimate your horse's weight
Mare Gestation Calculator
Estimate your mare’s foaling date
Polls
Users weigh in on horse health care
New Products
Recently launched horse health products
Get-A-DVM
Find an AAEP veterinarian near you
Podcasts
Ask TheHorse Live
The Horse's experts answer your questions during a monthly live audio event.
Weekly Horse Health Report
A weekly discussion on horse health topics.
Featured Podcasts
Listen Now!
How is Rain Rot Spread Between Horses?
Listen Now!
Itchy Horses: Dealing With Seasonal Skin Issues
Listen Now!
Vesicular Stomatitis: An Emerging Equine Disease
Sign up for Free Newsletters
Get the latest news and information on horse health care.
Horse Health
Nutrition
Soundness & Lameness
In-Depth
Welfare & Industry News
Farm & Barn
Breeding
Older Horse Care
Sports Medicine
Vet & Professional
Equine Behavior
Reader Favorites
Important Messages from TheHorse.com
From our partners
Bluegrass Equine Digest
TheHorse.com Partner Emails
Name
Email
In the April 2016 Issue:
Cover Story
Adopting a Mustang: What Does It Take?
Managing and training off-range Mustangs is different than for domestic breeds.
Also in this issue:
15 Is The New 10
Skin Issues: Scratching the Surface
Spring Calories Count
My Vet Bill is How Much?
Buy This Issue Subscribe Give a Gift Digital Edition
Shop The Horse Books & Products
The Horse Magazine Back Issues
Magazine Subscriptions
eBooks
Educational Materials
Apparel and GIfts
Sale
Featured Products
Equine Body Condition Score Poster
I make dirt, sweat, and slobber look good!
T-shirt
Partners in Equine Health
AAEP
AAEVT
WEVA
Facebook
Twitter
Pinterest
Youtube
RSS
Digital Edition
Subscribe
Newsletters
About Us
Contact Us
Advertise
Buy A Copy
Help
Meet the Staff
Freelance Info
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Community Policy
Cookie Policy
Seek the advice of a qualified veterinarian before proceeding with any diagnosis, treatment, or therapy.
Copyright © 2016 The Horse Media Group LLC.
All rights reserved.
Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without written permission of The Horse Media Group LLC is prohibited.
THE HORSE, THE HORSE logo, THEHORSE.COM and THEHORSE.COM logo are trademarks of The Horse Media Group LLC.