Mar
APR
May
15
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
15 Apr 16 - 15 Apr 16
Close Help
   << Previous Topic | Next Topic >>
Return to Index   
TWH's
March 25 2008 at 5:49 PM
Rita  (Login rmgwing )
Incredible that this still happens, (note particularly the penultimate paragraph) or what?! - hope the rewards make the difference!
"The Humane Society of the United States Announces $10,000 Reward for Information on Horse Soring
The Humane Society of the United States has announced it will offer a reward of $10,000 for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any violator of Tennessee’s “horse soring” law, which prohibits the deliberate infliction of pain to horses’ feet to produce an artificially high-stepping gait. Ads announcing the reward will appear throughout middle Tennessee, an area still believed to be a hotbed of soring activity.
“Soring - the deliberate infliction of pain upon a horse to increase the animal’s entertainment or monetary value - is incredibly cruel, and must end,” said Keith Dane, director of equine protection at The Humane Society of the United States. The soring of Tennessee Walking Horses and other breeds of gaited show horses is one of the most heinous forms of abuse inflicted upon equines in the U.S. The practice involves the use of caustic chemicals and chains on the legs of the horse, creating severe pain and forcing an exaggerated, high-stepping gait.
Pressure shoeing, another especially egregious form of soring, is the abusive technique of cutting a horse's hoof almost to the bloodline so the shoe puts painful pressure on the horse's sole with each stride. In some instances, foreign objects are placed between the hoof and the shoe to create painful pressure on the sole.
Passage of a federal law (the 1970 Horse Protection Act) has not had the intended effect of eliminating soring. Tennessee also has a state law prohibiting soring, but enforcement of these laws has proven difficult, and this illegal practice continues on a widespread basis. Therefore, The HSUS is offering this reward in order to encourage citizens to come forward and help end this entrenched cruelty.
In 2006, the annual Tennessee Walking Horse National Celebration in Shelbyville, TN failed to name a World Grand Champion when most of the finalists were disqualified for violations of the federal Horse Protection Act. Constituents, who support HSUS’ efforts and understand the need to end this cruel practice, have generously agreed to supplement the reward amount. In the past, supporters have offered similar backing for increased rewards in particular cases of animal cruelty.
Anyone with information on this cruel practice should call (866) 411-TEAM (8326). The Humane Society of the United States will protect the identity of all callers."
Rita
 
 
Respond to this message    
AuthorReplyAnonymous
(Login EasyAsPie )
Re: TWH's
March 26 2008, 12:19 PM 
Hi Rita
I've just come back from West Virigina, Tennesse, Alabama and North Georgia, training for my UKNHCP qualification.
I spent time with a farrier / trimmer in Tennessee and Alabama and its horrific!!  In reality everyone ignores this law as no one enforces it.  However as you see no one was awarded the "Prize" at the finls.  Hopefully, this will get things moving on. The TWH barn's are just rooms of torture you would not believe what is done to a horse in the pursuit of what humans perceive as excellence.
There are some good TWH shows which they call Flat Gait Shows and they tend to be barefoot and are allowed to perform what their natural gait would be. Its much more low key.
The Performance Shows are where you see the horses rolling their eyes in terror and pain and profuse sweating, with built up shoes, weights and the highest heels you've ever seen its just awful.  But the people who are attending the shows are going mad with elation at how the horses are performing!! Amazing that they cannot see the horror, but truly they can't.
America in general is a very strange place for horses, they have closed all the equine slaughter houses so if you want to put your horse down even if its sick you have to have a vet certificate and a vet has to euthanaise it and you then need some land to bury it on! there are no rendering plants left.  Otherwise you just leave it to starve to death and leave it where it drops or ship it to Mexico or Canada for slaughter.  Non of the options seem very appealing to me!
Hoofcare in general is woeful in the poorer area's (well and even the richer), you have journeyman farriers trimming feet that are logs and saying that the sole that is now pointing sykward is the pedal bone!!!  The guy who I mentored for is a saint, such a good trimmer and trying his very best to help as many horses as possible, often trimming 7 days a week from 8am to 10pm by the headlamps on his truck!.  In a 3 day stint with him I saw and helped trim 17 foundered or lamanitic horses and ponies.... I don't think I'll ever have 17 foundered horses on my books even on a 6 week trimming programme, let alone over 3 days!
Jo
 
 
Rita
(Login rmgwing )
Re: TWH's
March 26 2008, 8:46 PM 
Gosh, Jo, what an experience - thank goodness for people like your farrier friend..........those poor horses!  I'd read about the slaughter house closure and consequent problems, but didn't realise horse owners will have to find burial plots too!
Rita
 
 
 
   Respond to this message    
   << Previous Topic | Next Topic >>
Return to Index   