JAN
APR
SEP
15
2014
2016
2017
10 captures
18 Apr 13 - 10 Sep 16
Close Help
TheHorse.com: Your Guide to Equine Health Care
Sign In
Register
Topics
News
Videos & Photos
Free Reports
Blogs
Free Horses
Tools
Podcasts
Newsletters
Magazine
Shop
House Bill would Amend Horse Protection Act
By Pat Raia
Apr 15, 2013
Topics:
National (U.S.) Legalities
Soring Gaited Horses
Print
Email
Favorite
Share
Tweet
Newsletters
Photo: Photos.com
A new bill introduced into the U.S. House of Representatives would amend the Horse Protection Act (HPA) of 1970 by imposing stiffer penalties on anyone who sores a horse. Soring is the deliberate injury to a horse's feet and legs to achieve an exaggerated, high-stepping gait.
Currently the HPA establishes penalties for violators including maximum fines up to $3,000, imprisonment up to one year, or both. The penalty protocol contained in the law became controversial when some equine welfare advocates claimed that sentences connected to the federal case involving high-profile Tennessee Walking Horse Trainer Jackie McConnell were too lenient. Last year, U.S. Rep. Ed Whitfield of Kentucky, along with U.S. Rep. Steve Cohen of Tennessee, introduced HR 6388. That bill would have amended the HPA by stiffening soring penalties, however HR 6388 died in committee.
Whitfield's press secretary Chris Pack said that on April 11, Whitfield introduced the Prevent All Soring Tactics Act (HR 1518) into the U.S. House of Representatives.
“The bill is nearly the same as HR 6388 that was introduced during the last (Congressional) session,” Pack said.
If passed, HR1518 would boost maximum HPA violation penalties to $5,000, imprisonment up to three years, or both. The bill also increases penalties for those who disobey disqualification orders and for those who fail to pay a licensed HPA compliance inspector at horse shows, sales, and other events. In addition, the bill would also require the USDA to assign a licensed inspector if a Tennessee Walking Horse show management indicates its intent to hire one; the option of hiring of a licensed inspector remains voluntary under the proposed bill.
HR 1518 would also forbid trainers to use of action devices including metal chains and so-called “stacks” and pads, also known as performance packages. Performance packages are nailed to a horse’s hoof to add weight and height forcing the horse to lift its feed higher and to strike the ground harder. In some cases, sharp or hard objects can be concealed in performance packages to increase pressure to the soft tissue in horses’ feet to achieve a high-stepping gait. Metal chains can be attached the lower portion of a horse’s front legs and, in the case of sored horses, the chains rub against tissue sensitized by chemicals causing a horse to lift its front legs higher off the ground.
Teresa Bippen, president of Friends of Sound Horses, said passage of the legislation is necessary to protect gaited horses from harm.
“Soring is still rampant in many segments of the industry,” Bippen said. “Without this bill, there will be continued abuse of the Tennessee Walking Horse, Spotted Saddle Horse, and Racking Horse.”
Michael R. Inman, chief executive officer of the Tennessee Walking Horse National Celebration, and spokesman for Sound Horses, Honest Judging Objective inspections, Winning Fairly (SHOW), the horse industry organization that manages the flagship Tennessee Walking Horse industry event, said SHOW “is committed to the welfare of the Tennessee Walking show horse,” but was disappointed in the bill's proposed ban on pads.
“In review of the recently introduced Whitfield bill we are disappointed that Mr. Whitfield is attempting to eliminate weighted shoes, plastic pads, and six-ounce action devices, all found to be non-harmful to any horse through scientific study,” Inman said. “In fact the therapeutic values of the plastic pads are highlighted in his bill.”
In a written statement, Tracy Boyd, president of the Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders and Exhibitors Association, declined immediate comment on the legislation.
“We, as an executive committee, have yet to review and discuss HR 1518 to determine how it compares it to HR 6388, but we have a meeting scheduled on April 25 and (I) am certain it will be discussed at that time,” Boyd said in the statement. “We will certainly issue an opinion once we've had a chance to review it and discuss it as a committee.”
HR 1518 has been assigned to the House's Committee on Energy and Commerce, Pack said.
About the Author
Pat Raia
Pat Raia is a veteran journalist who enjoys covering equine welfare, industry, and news. In her spare time, she enjoys riding her Tennessee Walking Horse, Sonny.
Stay on top of the most recent Horse Health news with FREE weekly newsletters from TheHorse.com. Learn More
Free Newsletters
Sign up for the latest in:
Horse Health
Nutrition
Soundness & Lameness
In-Depth
Welfare & Industry News
Farm & Barn
Breeding
Older Horse Care
Sports Medicine
Vet & Professional
Equine Behavior
Reader Favorites
Important Messages from TheHorse.com
From our partners
Bluegrass Equine Digest
TheHorse.com Partner Emails
Email
Related Content
Article
Pay Homage to War Horses This Veteran's Day
Article
Bankruptcy: Can I Keep My Horse?
Article
USDA Coordinator Pledges Soring Law Enforcement
Article
Soring Inspections Stepped Up at Walking Horse Celebration
Article
New Soring Inspections Beef Up Celebration Plan
Article
Industry Members Discuss Imaging Technology at Soring Conference
Article
HSUS Soring Hotline Heats Up
Article
Saddlebred Won't be Exhumed--Yet
Commentary
I Bought a Horse with a Behavior Problem. Now What?
Commentary
Are Horse Club Boards Liable for Club-Related Injuries?
Prev Next
POLL: Slow Feeders
Have you ever used the following types of slow feeders? (Select all that apply.) Tell us about your experiences!
Slow feeding trough with metal grate
Barrel-style slow feeder
Slow feeding “pillow”
Haynet
Other (please explain)
I’ve never used a slow feeder for my horse.
Comments. 100 Characters Max
View Results
Horse Care
How to care for the basic health needs of horses
Diseases and Conditions
Horse-health-problem risk factors, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment
Nutrition
Proper feeding practices for foals, adult horses, and older horses
Lameness
Prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of leg lameness
Hoof Care
Prevention and treatment for problems of the equine foot
Farm and Barn
Design and maintain a healthy horse operation
Breeding and Reproduction
Horse breeding from planning through foal care
Vet and Professional
News and issues for equine health professionals
Sports Medicine
All aspects of caring for performance horses
Welfare and Industry
Discussions about the welfare of our equine friends
Topics A-Z
Recent News
What Smells do Stallions Find Sexy?
Study stallions bred quickest if they had the scent of urine from mares in heat on their nostrils. Read More
Monmouth Park Announces New Health Protocols For Shippers
Meeting for Fish Springs Wild Horse Pilot Program Scheduled
Lecture on Robotics-Controlled Imaging System Scheduled
The Equitwister: A Simplified Way to Castrate Working Equids
EEE Confirmed in Unvaccinated Florida Horse
Do Equine Genetics Influence Behavior?
When Nature Meets Science: Breeding with Frozen Semen
Registration Open for KHC Large Animal Rescue Training
View More
Event Coverage
AAEP Convention 2015
Las Vegas, Nevada
WEVA Congress 2015
Guadalajara, Mexico
ISES 2015
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
 
 
Videos
News/Interviews
Seminars
Vet Procedures
Featured Series
How-To
Webcasts
Products
5 Things You Need to Know
Slideshows
Infographics
How-To
Consider Native Plants in Horse Property Landscaping
Seminars
Navicular Disease
Slideshow
Shelter Options for Horses
Free Reports
Fact Sheets
Quick references of horse conditions, diseases & health topics
Special Reports
In-depth reports on many aspects of horse health care
Convention Reports
Detailed summaries of conventions and seminars on horse health
Forms
Featured Free Reports
Special Report
12 Facts about Equine Navicular Syndrome
Special Report
Just the Basics: What Every Horse Needs
Special Report
15 Facts About Breeding Sport Horses
Blogs
Across the Fence
At Home with Horses
Horse Sense (and Sensibility)
Horses and the Law
Old Horses: Better With Age
Smart Horse Keeping
The Horse 911: What's Your Emergency?
The Winning Edge
Trail Riding with The Horse
Weird Horse News
Commentary
Equine Behavior
Horse Nutrition
Featured Blogs
Horse Sense (and Sensibility)
For Want of an Curbed Appetite
Old Horses: Better With Age
Lines of Communication
Old Horses: Better With Age
Trudging Through Winter
Adopt a Horse
Browse horses that are FREE to a good home.
All Breeds
Thoroughbreds
Standardbreds
List Your Horse
Add your FREE horse to our list of adoptable horses.
List Your Horse
Horses that Found a Home
Adoption Resources
Learn more about adoption, whether you’re adopting a horse or giving a horse away.
Featured Adoptable Horse
chestnut filly
ruby
chestnut filly with 4 white socks and star.  She is friendly, takes treats and is curious. But she has not been trained and needs a consistant hand to train her. really beautiful with a graceful gait. registered pure Arabian.  must find a home fo ... Read More
Farm Call: Your Questions Answered
Q&As about caring for your horse
Event Calendar
Find upcoming horse health educational events
Glossary
Look up the meaning of horse health terms
TheHorse.com en Español
Articulos en Español (Articles in Spanish)
Normal Vital Signs
Healthy temperature, heart, & respiration rates
Weight Calculator
Estimate your horse's weight
Mare Gestation Calculator
Estimate your mare’s foaling date
Polls
Users weigh in on horse health care
New Products
Recently launched horse health products
Get-A-DVM
Find an AAEP veterinarian near you
Podcasts
Ask TheHorse Live
The Horse's experts answer your questions during a monthly live audio event.
Weekly Horse Health Report
A weekly discussion on horse health topics.
Featured Podcasts
Listen Now!
How is Rain Rot Spread Between Horses?
Listen Now!
Itchy Horses: Dealing With Seasonal Skin Issues
Listen Now!
Vesicular Stomatitis: An Emerging Equine Disease
Sign up for Free Newsletters
Get the latest news and information on horse health care.
Horse Health
Nutrition
Soundness & Lameness
In-Depth
Welfare & Industry News
Farm & Barn
Breeding
Older Horse Care
Sports Medicine
Vet & Professional
Equine Behavior
Reader Favorites
Important Messages from TheHorse.com
From our partners
Bluegrass Equine Digest
TheHorse.com Partner Emails
Name
Email
In the April 2016 Issue:
Cover Story
Adopting a Mustang: What Does It Take?
Managing and training off-range Mustangs is different than for domestic breeds.
Also in this issue:
15 Is The New 10
Skin Issues: Scratching the Surface
Spring Calories Count
My Vet Bill is How Much?
Buy This Issue Subscribe Give a Gift Digital Edition
Shop The Horse Books & Products
The Horse Magazine Back Issues
Magazine Subscriptions
eBooks
Educational Materials
Apparel and GIfts
Sale
 
Featured Products
Equine Body Condition Score Poster
I make dirt, sweat, and slobber look good! T-shirt
 
 
Partners in Equine Health
AAEP
AAEVT
WEVA
Facebook
Twitter
Pinterest
Youtube
RSS
Digital Edition
Subscribe
Newsletters
About Us
Contact Us
Advertise
Buy A Copy
Help
Meet the Staff
Freelance Info
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Community Policy
Cookie Policy
Seek the advice of a qualified veterinarian before proceeding with any diagnosis, treatment, or therapy.
Copyright © 2016 The Horse Media Group LLC. All rights reserved. Reproduction in whole or in part in any form or medium without written permission of The Horse Media Group LLC is prohibited. THE HORSE, THE HORSE logo, THEHORSE.COM and THEHORSE.COM logo are trademarks of The Horse Media Group LLC.