 
India
India      has been inhabited since about 70,000-60,000 BC - one of the earliest      locations to be permanently inhabited by hunter-gatherers who had emerged      from Africa up to 10,000 years before. That hunter-gatherer culture      continued in the rich, verdant and extremely fertile country of the      sub-continent until the first permanent settlements emerged in around      7000 BC in the Indus river valley, such as at Mergarh in modern      Baluchistan. Those settlements developed into the Indus Valley culture,      but while this provided an early flowering of civilisation in north-western      India in the third millennium BC, its demise around 1700 BC left South Asia      without an urban culture until small cities emerged in the east, in the      Ganges valley and northern India.
At around the same time, by 1500 BC, new peoples began to filter into India      from the north-west, from the direction of modern Afghanistan ,      displacing or mixing with the native Elamo -Dravidian      peoples. These were Indo-Europeans ,      originally from Central Asia, and the Black Desert region of modern Turkmenistan in particular, who had been forced to move from around 2000 BC by the same      climate change which brought the Indus Valley culture to an end. These      groups were seemingly the same as those that had integrated themselves into      the Oxus Civilisation in Transoxiana ,      but the change in climatic conditions had splintered them into several groups      which may well have formed the      Indo- Persians and Indo-Aryans (they appear around the same time and in roughly the same      general region), and possibly also the ancestors of the Indo-Scythians too.
This specific group called themselves Aryans (meaning the 'civilised' or      'respectable', although the rather tainted 'Aryan' term has been replaced      by modern scholars with the more accurate 'Indo-Aryan'). This rather      elitist naming was presumably in reaction to the apparently barbarous people      they encountered. They shared a common language base with the other      Indo-European groups which were spreading west and south from the Caucasus      and Russian Steppes and which later formed the basis of languages such as Greek , Persian ,      and Latin .      Even by the eighteenth century AD, similarities between the languages, which      in India emerged as Sanskrit, could easily be spotted by philologists. The      earliest Sanskrit texts, the Vedas (and in particular, the Rig      Veda) chart an Indo-European migration from Afghanistan (where rivers      with recognisable names are mentioned) into north-western India, notably      Peshawar, where they settled along the Indus Valley, the river which gave      India its name.
(Additional details on the migration of the Indo-Europeans into India      from the BBC series, The Story of India, by Michael Wood, first      broadcast between August-September 2007. Further additional information      from The Horse, the Wheel, and Language: How Bronze-Age Riders from      the Eurasian Steppes Shaped the Modern World, David W Anthony.)
c.1500 BC
The first signs of Indo-European culture emerges between Peshawar and the Ganges Plain. The      latter region, in modern Bihar, witnesses the first and greatest of Indian      kingdoms, that of Magadha . This      migration into India by Indo-Europeans and the founding of their first      kingdoms is highly controversial in modern India, with some arguments even      going to state that there is no such 'invasion'. The consensus of more      considered opinion is that it does indeed happen and that much of the      accepted information below is largely true (even if individual facts may      seem rather shaky).
The Ganges Plain saw the rise of the first northern Indian                  kingdoms from around the sixteenth century BC onwards
Kingdom of Magadha
This was one of the first kingdoms to be founded by the newly arrived Indo-European Aryans in India      after 1500 BC. The heart of the early Aryan territory was the region of      Peshawar in modern Pakistan ,      but the Magadhas may have been amongst the first to venture further eastwards.      Centred on the Ganges Plain, in modern Bihar, their kingdom was one of the      sixteen 'Great Countries' or regions (Mahājanapadas, in Sanskrit). The      kingdom later spread out to encompass much of India during an era of heroic      warfare which came to be crystallised as the Indian epic, the Mahabharata. The first capital was Rajagaha (modern Rajgir) before      being transferred to Pataliputra (modern Patna).
The early rulers, down to the sixth century BC are almost entirely unknown      outside traditional texts, such as the Puranas, and Buddhist and Jain texts.      Although India's strong oral culture means the list of kings is probably      reliable, it is open to much debate. The Haryanka ruler, Bimbisara, is the first of the Magadhan      kings to be dated with anything approaching accuracy, and the dates of those      before him are calculated backwards using assumed lengths of rule. Modern      Indian historians tend to assume longer lengths, pushing the start of this      list back to an earlier date than is shown here. This has the effect of      placing the earliest Magadha rulers in Peshawar, or still on the migratory      trail into India, whereas here they are assumed to have already infiltrated      the Ganges Plain before their first Indian (as opposed to Aryan migration)      dynasty is proclaimed.
Sudhanu Dynasty
According to the Srimad Bhagavatam (Bhagavata Purana), the story of Krishna,      one of Hinduism's most important texts, "Another son of Ajamidha was named      Rksa. From Rksa came a son named Samvarana, and from Samvarana came Kuru,      the king of Kuruksetra [the scene of the great war in the Mahabharata,      composed between about 400 BC-AD 400]. Kuru had four sons: Pariksi, Sudhanu,      Jahnu and Nisadha." Sudhanu inherited the kingdom which became Magadha.
fl c.1460? BC
Son.
Brhadratha Dynasty
It seems likely that the powerful Magadha kingdom was established on the      Ganges Plain by these legendary kings. The second of them, Jarasandha, is      mentioned in the Purana texts as a son of Brhadratha. He also appears in the Mahabharata as the 'Magadhan emperor who rules all India,' although      he was killed in single combat by one of three assassins from the kingdom of      Kuru, who were concerned with liberating the many captive kings he held. The      long line of kings who succeeded him are all mentioned in the Buddhist,      Hindu, and Jain texts. By this time, other Aryan kingdoms had apparently      emerged alongside Magadha, notably in the east, including Anga , Kalinga , Pundra , Suhma, and Vanga . The Assam region was also enjoying      its first flush of kingship.
The list of legendary Brhadratha kings shown in black is from the Vayu      Purana, but the the Matsya Purana shows a  list of names which      differs in places, and these are inserted where appropriate in red.
(Additional information by Abhijit Rajadhyaksha and Edward Dawson.)
fl c.1360? BC
Son. Crowned emperor of Magadha.
c.1300? BC
One of Jarasandha's contemporaries is Jayatsena of Magadha, probably an      ally and vassal who rules a section of the kingdom independently after     Jarasandha's death. Jayatsena takes part in the Kurukshetra War in the Mahabharata as one of the leaders on the side of the Kauravas,      along with Srutayus of Kalinga ,      Paundraka Vasudeva of Pundra , Karna of Anga , and Malayadwaja of the Pandyas .      Bhagadatta of the Naraka kings is also involved in the war.
Jarasandha is killed by Bhima, one of the heroes of the Mahabharata,      who slays him after an intense fight (of twenty-seven days) on the advice of      Lord Krishna, who is revered as a god. He is the second assassin of the three,      the final one being Arjuna (Bhima's brother and a superb archer), the      illustrious pivotal character in the Mahabharata.
Somapi
In the Vayu      Purana only.
Ripunjaya
Sunika / Pradyota Dynasty
There are two conflicting claims for the founder of this dynasty, with both      the first two rulers being given the honour. According to the Vayu Purana,      the Pradyotas ruled Magadha for 138 years from 799-684 BC, when they were      displaced by the Shishunagas who rose up during a period of lawlessness in      the kingdom (but see the Sisunaka dynasty for      more on the confusion over Shishunaga in c.684 and 410 BC). In      support of this, the dynasty ends with Varttivarddhana in most lists, with      Shishunaga's successors here mostly being repeated in the Sisunaka      list.
Sunika / Punika
Kshatraujas
Haryanka Dynasty
Bimbisara founded a new dynasty and showed great energy in expanding the      kingdom, either through conquest or marriage, subjecting the rival kingdom      of Anga in what is now western Bengal via the former means.      His son, Ajatashatru, completed his work, strengthening the capital at      Rajagriha and expanding westwards up the Ganges. The capital was later      transferred to Pataliputra (modern Patna in Bihar) by Ajatashatru.      Confusingly, Bimbisara is also claimed for the Shishunaga dynasty beginning      in c.684 BC, perhaps indicating that the use of Haryanka as a dynasty name      is a later modification.
c.543 - 491 BC
Murdered by his son.
c.543 BC
While still crown prince, Bimbisara had killed King Bramhadatta of Anga and annexed      his state. Now it seems that Anga is absorbed into the increasingly powerful Magadhan      state by Bimbisara.
c.491 - 459 BC
Ajatashatru
Son. (Or ruled c.551-519 BC)
Gaining the kingdom by murdering his father, Ajatashatru is also a      contemporary of Gautama Buddha (c.563-483 BC, but many dating variations are      proposed by various scholars). He strengthens the kingdom by annexing the      rival kingdoms of Kashi and Kosala,  is at war with the Vriji Confederacy for      sixteen years, and defeats the fractured Lichchhavi kingdom north of the Ganges.
After he had crystallised the tenets of the Eightfold Path in                  his mind, the Buddha travelled from Bodh Gaya to Sarnath, site of the                  First Sermon
Darshaka
Descent unknown, and not shown in all lists.
c.459 - 443 BC
Son. Succeeded through assassination.
c.410 BC
The continuing bloodshed in the dynasty probably leads to a civil war in      which the Haryankas are replaced by their former court officials, the Sisunakas .
Sisunaka Dynasty (Shishunaga)
Some sources state that the Sisunagas began with the Shishunaga of c.684 BC, and      there seems to be some confusion over whether they were one and the same      person or two entirely separate rulers. The second appearance of the name,      Sisunaga, is used here as the founder of his eponymous dynasty. The Magadha      capital remained at Pataliputra.
410 - 392 BC
Former amatya (official) under the Haryankas.
392 - 380 BC
Kalasoka
380 - 358 BC
Kalasoka's ten sons rule the kingdom in succession over the course of the      next twenty-two years, the most prominent being:
Nandivardhana
One of the ten sons of Kalasoka.
Ksemadharman
Repeated from the Pradyota list.
Ksemajit or Ksatraujas
Repeated from the Pradyota list.
Bimbisara
A repetition of the king of c.543 BC?
? - 344? BC
Chandragupta Maurya is claimed as his possible son.
Nanda Dynasty
The Sisunakas were overthrown by Mahapadma Nanda, first of the 'Nine Nandas'.      He is said to have been an illegitimate son of the last Sisunaka ruler,      Mahanandin, or at least, of low birth. The other eight Nanda monarchs were      all the sons of Mahapadma. Under the Nandas, the kingdom regained its western      Indian territories for a time, right      up to the border of modern Pakistan .      It also extended south to the Deccan plateau.
One interesting theory regarding the Nanda kings, put forward by Dr Ranajit      Pal, suggests they were not originally based in Bihar but were instead from      Magan in the west. Inscription and name evidence seems to suggest that      Darius II and Artaxerxes III of Persia may have been Nanda kings, although there is no other proof for      a Persian presence so far east.
c.370 - 324 BC
Mahapadma Nanda
Son of Sisunaka Dynasty's Mahanandin? Died aged 88.
Over the course of his long reign, according to the Mahabharata, Mahapadma Nanda defeats many rival kings and tribes,      including the Asmakas, Haihayas, Ikshvaku dynasty, Kalingas , Kasis, Kurus,      Maithilas, Panchalas, Surasenas, and Vitihotras.
Pandhuka
Brother. Aggrammes or Xandrames to the Greeks.
327 - 326 BC
Alexander the Great's Macedonian army enters western India through the passes of the Hindu      Kush, aided by the king of Gandhara in his war against Kekaya and by the Indo-Scythians under Omarg. But in the Punjab his troops rebel against the prospect of more      battles against another great army on the Ganges. Alexander is forced to pull      back, abandoning his hopes of conquering India. However, a swathe of minor      states across northern India remain his vassals.
c.321 BC
Dhana is defeated by the young son of a Nanda prince (or the son of a village headman - opinion is divided), who is called Chandragupta Maurya,      and then murdered (by assailant(s) unknown), because he is apparently      despised due to his low birth, and his wickedness.
Mauryan Empire
321 - 185 BC
Possibly because of the pressure exerted by the Persian empire, at its margins there developed centralised territorial states, including      the Macedonian kingdom in Greece. The arrival of Alexander the Great into      India also inspired the creation of India's first true empire, the Mauryan      empire in northern India, which remains one of the country's greatest. At      the behest of his teacher, who had been a subject of Dhana Nanda and who had      fled when his father had been murdered by the king, Chandragupta Maurya      conquered Magadha , incorporating it as      the heart of his new empire, and retaining the capital at Pataliputra. His      former teacher, Vishnugupt Chanakya, became his prime minister.
When Chandragupta encountered the Greek forces which Alexander the Great      left in India, they knew him as Sandrokotos. His conquests in      Macedonian-controlled northern India caused the vassal states to assassinate      the Greek satrap, Philippus, severing the      Greeco- Bactrian control of India.
(Additional information by Abhijit Rajadhyaksha, and Madhu Nimkar, and      from External Link: Encyclopædia      Britannica .)
c.324 - 301 BC
Founder      of the empire in 321 BC.
321 BC
Following his coronation, Chandragupta embarks on his conquest of the rest      of India, starting from central India. He overcomes all opposition in the      territory up to the north of the River Narmada.
305 - 303 BC
Following the failure of Seleucus Nicator's Greek reconquest of India, the Indo-Greek regions of Paropamisadae (immediately to the east of Bactria ,      covering northern Pakistan and      eastern Afghanistan ), Arachosia (modern southern Afghanistan and northern and central Pakistan,      and perhaps extending as far as the Indus), and the Punjab are ceded to the      Mauryan empire by the Seleucids as part of an alliance agreement. Arachosia's capital is      Alexandria in Arachosia (the modern form of which is Kandahar). Subsequent      relations between the Greeks and the Mauryans appear to be cordial. Seleucus      even appoints Megasthenes as his ambassador to Chandragupta's court.
Chandragupta's Mauryan capital of Pataliputra (modern Patna) as it would                  have appeared from the air in the fourth century BC
301 - 269 BC
Son.     Gained Deccan plateau. Amitrochates to the Greeks.
Sushima
Son. Defeated in the succession war by Ashoka.
273 - 269 BC
There      is a war of succession in the empire, in which Ashoka is said to fight his      ninety-nine brothers, probably meaning insurmountable odds. Ultimately      Ashoka is victorious and claims the throne.
269 - 232 BC
Brother.      Buddhist.
c.261 BC
During      his reign, Ashoka manages to extend the empire's borders to cover almost      the entire subcontinent, save the southern tip and Sri Lanka. Perhaps his      greatest feat as a military commander is the conquest of the kingdom of Kalinga in a      conflict which devastates large swathes of the populace and his own army.      Witnessing the destruction, Ashoka renounces violence and becomes a Buddhist.
250 BC
In his role as a devout Buddhist, Ashoka visits Nepal on pilgrimage.
232 BC
Some historians theorise that Ashoka and Diodotus II of Bactria are one and the same, and there evidence to support the theory.     After his death, Ashoka's sons dispute the title     and (as in Bactria) the empire starts to crumble. Kalinga is one of      the first to separate.
Kunal / Kunala
Son. Blinded by one of Ashoka's wives.
232 - 224 BC
Succeeded when half-brother Kunal became blind.
224 BC
All of the subsequent kings are weak, and territory begins to be eroded away      from the empire, notably by the Indo-Greek kings in the north-west. Despite this it is probably still a      force to be reckoned with.
The kingdom of Bactria (shown in white) was at the height of its      power around 200-180 BC, with fresh conquests being made in the      south-east, encroaching into India just as the Mauryan empire was      on the verge of collapse, while around the northern and eastern      borders dwelt various tribes that would eventually contribute to      the downfall of the Greeks - the Sakas and Tocharians (click on      map to show full sized)
224 - 215 BC
Last Mauryan king -     assassinated.
185 BC
Much shrunken since the days of Ashoka, the empire is overthrown by General Pusyamitra Sunga . The Macedonian kings of Bactria annexe the western half of the empire, including Paropamisadae and Arachosia ,      advancing as far as the Ganges and the capital at Pataliputra (modern Patna).      In Kalinga, the Chedi assume control, while minor kingdoms spring up elsewhere in India. The most      powerful of these are in the south, on the Deccan plateau, and in the west,      while the north remains most culturally active. A line of Mauryas springs up      in Goa in the sixth century AD, but      the connection between them and the great Mauryas is unknown.
Sunga Empire
185 - 78 BC
General Pusyamitra Sunga, the commander-in-chief of the Mauryan forces, destroyed the Mauryans and created his own dynasty. Despite losing half of the former      Mauryan territories to Bactria and various minor kingdoms,      the Sunga remained dominant in the east, up to the border of the now Indo-Greek Punjab. They also persecuted Buddhists, who      were welcomed and protected by the neighbouring Bactrians.
(Additional information by Abhijit Rajadhyaksha.)
185 - 149 BC
Dynasty founder.
c.175 BC
Kharavela of Kalinga attacks Magadha      at the same time as      Demetrius of Bactria invades Magadha from the west, crossing the Ganges for the first      time. Rather than press home his own attack, Kharavela turns on the Bactrian      king and forces him to retreat.
c.166 BC
For a second time, Kharavela of Kalinga marches      his army towards the old enemy, Magadha, and its Sunga king,      Brihaspathimitra (perhaps meaning viceroy, as his father is still in overall      command), who agrees peace terms before any blood is shed.
c.150s BC
The Sakas are displaced from Farghana      by the Great Yuezhi (Tocharians), an event that is connected with the      migration of the Yuezhi across Da Yuan (the Chinese term for      Farghana). These mass migrations of the second century BC are confused and      somewhat lacking in Greek and Chinese sources      because the territory concerned is beyond any detailed understanding of      theirs. Whatever the reason, the Saka king transfers his headquarters to the south, across the      Hanging Passage that leads Jibin. This is part of a southwards trend for the      Sakas, and by approximately the mid-first century BC, Saka kings appear in India.
149 - 141 BC
Brihaspathimitra / Agnimitra
Son.
Governor of Vidisha during his father's      lifetime, in this capacity Agnimitra campaigns in the south-west against      Yajnasena, the ruler of Berar (Vidharba). He successfully divides the kingdom in two and parcels it out      between Yajnasena and his estranged cousin, Madhavasena (who had sought      Pushyamitra's help). Both kings accept Pushyamitra's suzerainty.
141 - 131 BC
Son and successor according to the Matsya Purana.
141 - 131 BC
Son and successor according to the other Puranas.
131 - 124 BC
Brother. Also credited with repulsing Demetrius of Bactria .
124 - 122 BC
Mentioned by the Puranas.
110 BC
The Heliodorus pillar in Vidisha in central India records      that the Indo-Greek King Antialcidas sends an ambassador to the court of the Sunga king Bhagabhadra      at or before this date.
c.100 - 70 BC
Philoxenus      briefly rules the whole of the remaining Indo-Greek territory.      He may even extend his rule as far as the city of Mathura (in modern Uttar      Pradesh), according to an inscription there. From 95 BC the territories fragment      again, with the western kings regaining their territory as far west as Arachosia . Some time after 70 BC, Mathura is lost to Indian kings, as is      south-eastern Punjab.
83 - 73 BC
The last independent Sunga king. Assassinated.
73 - 71 BC
Devabhuti is assassinated by a slave girl on the orders of his minister.      Within two years the Sunga dynasty is replaced in political dominance by      the Kanavas .
71 - 30 BC
Although the weakened Sunga kings have been allowed since      71 BC to retain their throne as mere puppets of the Kanava rulers, in 30 BC,      both they and the Kanava are swept away by the conquering Andhras from      the south.
Kanava Dynasty
71 - 26 BC
The Kanava (or Kanva) dynasty of the kingdom of Magadha replaced the Sunga in 71 BC. They ruled      the eastern section of the once-great empire, with borders probably more      akin to Magadha's ancient territory. The much-reduced Sunga kings were      allowed to remain on their throne, but were politically emasculated in an      obscure corner of the kingdom. The Kanavas (or Kanvas) also subdued the once-mighty Satvahanas in southern India for a time.
71 - c.66 BC
Former minister of the last Sunga king.
c.66 - 52 BC
Bhumimitra
c.57 BC
Indo-Scythian King Azes consolidates Saka territory by absorbing that of a rival king,      presumably when the death of the latter king leaves his territory unguarded.      The Sakas also capture Modura around this time (Mathura in Utter Pradesh,      northern India). However, in the same year the Indo-Scythians are repelled      from the area of Ujjain by King Vikramaditya of Malwa after occupying it for      perhaps two decades or more. To commemorate the event Vikramaditya establishes      the Vikrama era, a specific Indian calendar that used 57 BC as its starting      date.
By the period between 100-50 BC the Greek kingdom of Bactria      had fallen and the remaining Indo-Greek territories (shown in      white) had been squeezed towards Eastern Punjab. India was      partially fragmented, and the once tribal Sakas were coming to      the end of a period of domination of a large swathe of territory      in modern Afghanistan, Pakistan, and north-western India. The      dates within their lands (shown in yellow) show their defeats      of the Greeks that had gained them those lands, but they were      very soon to be overthrown in the north by the Kushans while      still battling for survival against the Satvahanas of India      (click on map to show full sized)
c.52 - 40 BC
Susarman
26 BC
Both the Sunga and the Kanava are swept away by the conquering Andhras from the south.      Northern India is dominated either by the south or by invaders from the west for the next two and-a-half      centuries. Magadha as a recognisable entity effectually ceases to exist.      Instead, it re-emerges as Bihar, which is fought over by successive regional      rulers, including those at Delhi and in Bengal .
Middle Kingdoms of India
Following the destruction of the Mauryans , India had divided into a      mass of major and minor kingdoms. Towards the end of the Iron Age in India, the Kushan people founded an empire which stretched from the      west and covered much of India right down to the south. They entered India      at some point between about AD 90-112 and immediately conquered the      Indo-Scythian Sakas and set their borders to      include Punjab and parts of modern Uttar Pradesh. A later ruler annexed      Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Kashmir, Malwa, Rajputana , Saurashtra, and extended his      rule as far as Khotan (southern India).
The Kushans were toppled between around      230-250, and replaced as the dominant power in northern India by the Guptas. While      subjugated by the Guptas, the Kushans were finally conquered by the Red Huns, a      sub-grouping of the White Huns who had taken the territory of the Kushanshahs to the west. The Sakas were also able to rise to renewed prominence in some      areas of India, although they were opposed by the Satvahanas and      eventually conquered by the Guptas. In the Deccan , various small kingdoms      emerged, but the Vakatakas and the Pallavas both created large kingdoms in the fourth century      which covered swathes of central India and extended north and west.
Gupta Dynasty
AD 320 - 550
The Guptas were the descendants of an obscure line of local rulers, probably in Bihar      (often linked to western Bengal ),      the heart of former Magadha rule. They      first rose to power in the third century, at around the same time as      the Kushan empire in northern      and western India was collapsing. By the      fifth century they controlled India from the Himalayas to the River Narmada,      and the Bay of Bengal to the Arabian Sea - the subcontinent's second great      empire which reunited most of India. Their capital was at Pataliputra      (modern Patna, in the northern state of Bihar), and this was the      last great flourishing of the Magadha kingdom, which by now was perhaps 1500 years      old.
(Additional information by Madhu Nimkar & Sanjeev Kumar.)
c.260 - 280
Son. 'Maharaja'. Kushan vassal?
c.300 - 320
By      now the Guptas have established themselves and rule a few small Hindu      kingdoms in Magadha. The son of Ghatotkacha, Chandragupta, succeeds his      father as a local chief within Magadha (covering parts of the modern Bihar      state). He increases his power and territory by marrying Princess Kumaradevi      of the Lichchavi tribe, which controls northern Bihar and perhaps Nepal . Their      union by marriage enhances the power and prestige of Chandra's new kingdom,      which by c.320 encompasses territory from the Ganges to Prayaga (modern      Allahabad). At this time, Chandragupta decides to assume the imperial title      'Maharajadhiraja', at a formal coronation, which also seems to signal the      start of the Gupta era as well as Gupta coinage.
c.300 - 330
Son. Brought Guptas to     power. m daughter of the king of Nepal .
330 - 370
Son. Title used:      'Parakramah', 'All Powerful'.
c.340
Early      in his reign, Samudragupta takes the kingdoms of Shichchhatra and Padmavati.      Then he attacks the Malwas, the Yaudheyas, the Arjunayanas, the Maduras, and      the Abhiras , all of which are tribes in the region. The Pallavas are also      defeated. He incorporates over      twenty kingdoms into his realm and his rule soon extends from the Himalayas      to the River Narmada and from the Brahmaputra to the Yamuna.
The Guptas issued a large number of gold coins, the two sides of                  this example being of a King & Queen on Couch / Vaikuntha type from                  the reign of Chandragupta I
370
Following Samudragupta's reign, there is a possibility that his eldest son,      Ramagupta, succeeds him. However, Ramagupta is a shadowy figure whose      existence is in question. If he exists at all it seems he embarks on an      ill-planned campaign against the Sakas in Gujarat and is trapped along with      his army. Rescued by his brother he is soon deposed and killed by that same      brother, Chandragupta II.
370 - 375?
Son.
c.375?
Kachagupta is another mysterious figure in the dynasty. His name is not      listed in genealogical information available through the various      inscriptions discovered, including the Allahabad Pillar inscriptions.      Ramagupta and Kachagupta may be one and the same, but it also seems possible      from numismatic evidence that they reigned in turn after Samudragupta,      although the order could be interchangeable. It is also possible that      Kachagupta ruled briefly, prior to the official succession of Chandragupta      II, and that     Ramagupta issued his own copper coinage (no gold coins have been found) in      opposition to him.
Kachagupta?
Brother.
375 - 409
Chandragupta expands the kingdom westwards, defeating the Western Sakas in a campaign which lasts until 409. He also defeats the Bengali (Vanga) chiefdoms, allowing him to extend his control from coast to      coast, and to establish a second (trading) capital at Ujjain. In 395, the Sakas are finally finished off as a regional power. His daughter, Prabhavatigupta,      marries the Vakataka king, Rudrasena II, and following his early death,      governs the kingdom as regent for twenty years, uniting it to her father's      empire during that time.
c.375?
There is no evidence of any Kushan kings in their eastern      state in Punjab after the reign of Kipunada. They are first subjugated by      the Guptas      and then overthrown by the invading Red Huns.
c.410 - 413
After finishing his campaigns both in the east and west of      India, Chandragupta proceeds northwards to subjugate the      White Huns and  the Kamboja tribes which are located in the west and east Oxus valleys respectively. Then he proceeds across the Himalayas      and reduces the Kinnaras, Kiratas, and other minor peoples, drawing their      lands into India proper.
415 - 455
Son.
c.455
The accession of Kumaragupta had seen the continuation of      his father's secure empire under his able rule. However, the last days of      his reign are less comfortable, as the empire is threatened by invasions by      the foreign Pushyamitras. At a point somewhere around the same time, the Red Huns      seize Kabul and venture east into Punjab and up against the kingdom's      borders, near Doab or Malwa, but they are repulsed by Skandagupta.
455 -       467
Son. Last great      Gupta ruler.
455 - c.467
The      early years of Skandagupta's reign are marked by violent civil war between      the sons of Kumaragupta. Skandagupta manages to defeat his rivals and ascend      the throne. However, continual      threats arise, first from the Pushyamitras, whom he defeats, and then from      the White Huns (or Huna) who invade from the north-west. They are      repulsed in c.467, but the empire is sapped of resources and begins to      decline. There      may be a partition of the empire, or at least a semi-independent      sub-division of it, but the main branch rules from Malwa, while      it is unclear where the other is based or how much power it has, and dates for all      remaining rulers is uncertain.
c.468 - 473
Son of      Purugupta. Ruled from where?
c.470
Narasimhagupta drives the White Huns from the plains of      northern India, but the Red Huns sense an opportunity in the increasing      fragility of the empire and begin menacing its borders.
c.469 - 471?
Brother of Skandagupta and      rival.
472 - 475
Uncle of      Kumaragupta II. Ruled from Malwa.
480s - 500
The White Hun king, Toramana, breaks through the Gupta      defences in the north-west, and much of the empire is overrun by the Huns by      500. The empire disintegrates under Toramana's attacks, and those of his      successor, Mihirakula. The White Huns conquer several provinces of the      former empire, including Malwa, while Gujarat, and Thaneshwar break away under local      dynasties. The surviving Guptas are forced south and east, to Jabbalpur (in      modern Madhya Pradesh) and North Bengal , where they establish minor Gupta      holdings.
c.496 - 500?
Identified by      coinage only. Same person as Purugupta?
c.499 - 543?
Son. Ruled from      Malwa until it was lost by 500.
500 - 530s
It appears from inscriptions that although the Guptas are      much diminished, they continue to rule in small pockets, one of which is in the Jabbalpur region of      the Narmada Valley (in 528). They continue to resist the Huns and  ally themselves      to the newly independent kingdoms, including Thaneshwar , to drive the Huns from      most of northern India by the 530s.
fl 508
Ruled from North Bengal ?
c.550s
Vishnu Gupta is one of the lesser Guptas from the tail end      of the dynasty, and is generally recognised as being the last of them to      hold any real authority during his ten year reign. His rule covers at least      North Bengal (in 543-544). Shortly afterwards, the Sassanids of Persia make conquests in India and the Pratihara dynasty of Gujarat emerges.
late 6th cent
Known only from a few copper coins.
fl c.600
In Malava.     Known only from a few gold coins.
606
Deva      Gupta is killed by Harshavardhana of Thaneshwar in revenge for having arranged the murder of the preceding      Thaneshwar king through treachery.
Thaneshwar Kingdom (Sthanviswara / Thanesa)
c.AD 580 - 647
Thanesar is a small region in northern India, centred on the Ganges Plain.      Now part of Haryana state, during the seventh century, it was known as      Thaneshwar, or Sthanviswara of Srikantha Janapada. The Thaneshwar kingdom was formed by newly      independent princes following the disintegration of the Gupta empire as it came under relentless      attack by the White Huns and Red Huns. With northern India in danger of      being entirely overrun by these barbarians, Thaneshwar allied itself to the      reduced Gupta rulers, along with other local kingdoms, and together they      forced out the invaders  by the 530s.
Harshavardhana became one of the most illustrious of Indian emperors. At the      peak of his reign, his kingdom covered Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh,      Rajasthan, Orissa , Bengal and      the entire Gangetic belt as far as the River Narmada. Harshavardhana      belonged to the Pushyabhuti dynasty (which was founded by Pushyabhuti, a      Shiva worshipper). History knows of him and his ancestors through several      plates, seals, inscriptions, coins (at Banskheda, Madhuban, Nalanda, Sonepat,      and Nabha), and texts such as the Harshacharita by Banabhat and the      accounts (Si-yuki) of the Chinese traveller Hiuen Tsang.
The Pushyabhutis were probably vassals of the Malwa kings and later the      Gupta kings, but after the Hunnic invasion they declared their independence.      The Madhubana / Sonepat copper plate inscriptions list some of the kings who      were part of this dynasty.
(Additional information by  Abhijit Rajadhyaksha.)
fl 510
Probably a Malwa or Gupta vassal.
Rajyavardhana I
Prabhakarvardhana
Threw off overlordship?
Prabhakarvardhana is an independent monarch who uses the prefix      'maharajadhiraja' before his name. He establishes matrimonial relations with      the Maukharis by marrying his daughter, Rajashri, to their king, Grahavarman.
Prabhakarvardhana is a Shaivite and a sun worshipper. Along with his son, Rajyavardhana,      he repels Huna      attacks and comes to be known as 'the lion to the Huna deer'.
606
Son. Murdered.
606
Immediately after his succession, Rajyavardhana's brother-in-law,      Grahavarman of the Maukharis, is killed by Deva Gupta, the last of the Gupta kings. Rajyavardhana's sister is      taken prisoner, and Rajyavardhana attacks Malava and its king, defeating      him. Then Shashanka of the Gauda kingdom feigns      friendship so that he can kill Rajyavardhana at the behest of Deva Gupta.
606 - 647
Brother. Reunited      large parts of      northern India.
606
Harshavardhana,      or Siladitya as he is also known, is sixteen when he accedes to the throne.      He swears revenge and defeats Shashanka of the Gauda kingdom (with      assistance from the Varman king, Bhaskaravarman), kills Deva Gupta (ending the Gupta line of kings), and frees his captive sister.
Harshavardhana controlled a large empire across northern India
c.625
Following Shashanka's death, his Gauda kingdom falls apart and the region descends into anarchy      until it is conquered by Harshavardhana.
During his reign, Harsha also      subdues the Maitrekas who  rule Vallabhi, and the Gurjaras who are also in the      west of India, along with Magadha (Bihar), and Bengal ( Gauda ), Orissa is      also captured.
Bhaskaravarman, the king of Kamarupa ( Assam ), is Harsha's close ally, while his daughter is married to Dhruvasena II of Vallabhi      (whom he had earlier defeated). Harsha shifts his capital to Kannauj .
647
Harsha      dies without an heir.     His former minister seizes the throne, but the empire breaks up into a patchwork of fighting states and petty kingdoms that      does not     reform into one kingdom. Kannauj itself becomes home to a Rajput kingdom. For the next 300 years India's main events occur in the      southern plateau, beginning with the rise of the Chalukyas .
647
Former minister.
647
The Chinese emperor, T'ai Tsung,      sends an emissary to Thaneshwar expecting him to meet Harshavardhana, but      instead the emissary finds the usurper, Arjuna, on the throne. Arjuna      allegedly tried to take him prisoner, but the emissary escapes to Tibet and      seeks help there in defeating Arjuna. The usurper is taken prisoner and sent      to the Chinese court.
c.684
King of Magadha . His daughter m Shiva Deva II, king of Nepal .
Badami Chalukyas
AD 543 - 753
The Chalukyas formed a powerful dynasty which was founded by Pulakeshi I,      who originated from a place called Vatapi (now known as Badami, in Bagalkot,      Karnataka state). At its height between the sixth and twelfth centuries the      Chalukya kingdom ruled large areas of central and southern India, mostly      towards the western coast. During this period, they ruled as three related,      but individual dynasties. The earliest dynasty, known as the 'Badami      Chalukyas', ruled from their capital at Vatapi from the middle of the sixth      century. The Badami Chalukyas began to assert their independence when the Kadamba kingdom of Banavasi declined, and they rapidly rose to prominence      during the reign of Pulakeshi II. The dynasty was previously thought by some      scholars to have migrated from Central Asia, a relative of Iraq's Seleukiya tribe, but      that idea has since been rejected.
The rule of the Chalukyas marks an important milestone      in the history of southern India and a golden age in the history of      Karnataka. The political atmosphere in southern India shifted from smaller      kingdoms to large empires with the ascendancy of the Badami Chalukyas. For      the first time, a southern Indian kingdom took control and consolidated the      entire region between the Kaveri and Narmada rivers. The rise of this empire      saw the birth of efficient administration, overseas trade and commerce, and      the development of a new style of architecture called 'Chalukyan      architecture'.
(Additional information by  Madhu Nimkar and Abhijit Rajadhyaksha.)
c.500 - 520
Mentioned as a vassal chieftain under the Kadambas .
c.520 - 540
Brother.
c.608?
Mangalesa      manages to force the Kalachuri king to flee, taking his lands, which consist      of northern Maharashtra, Malwa and the western Deccan .
609 - 642
Son of Kirtivarman.
615
Pulakeshi conquers the eastern Deccan , taking territory corresponding to the      coastal districts of modern Andhra Pradesh from the Vishnukundina kingdom,      as well as territory from the Pallavas .      He appoints his brother, Kubja Vishnuvardhana, as viceroy.
624
Kubja Vishnuvardhana declares his independence, ruling the Eastern Chalukyas as a separate kingdom.
642 - 655
Civil war follows the death of Pulakeshi.
647
In      the north, the last great power there, the Thaneshwar kingdom, begins to break      up after a former minister seizes the throne.
642 - 680
Brother and rival for the throne.
Adityavarma
Brother and rival for the throne.
Jayasimha
Brother and rival for the throne.
Ambera
Brother and rival for the throne.
670 - 674
The Pallava king, Mahendravarman II,      is killed in a collective attack by the Chalukyas, the Gangas and the Pandyas . As      soon as his son, Parameshvaravarman, gains the throne, he continues fighting      the Chalukyas (under the name of Vikramaditay I in Chalukya records). He captures      Kanchi and advances south to the River Kaveri. In 674 he fights the Battle of      Peruvalanallur, near Trichinopoly, and is victorious despite facing a huge      coalition.
677 - 680
Parameshvaravarman of the Pallavas occupies Chalukyan territories      from which he withdraws only after the Chalukyan rulers agree to pay a yearly tribute      and accept Pallava overlordship, but not before the occupation army annihilates several      Chalukyan princes, nobles and citizens. This victory enables the Pallavas to assert their      hegemony over the subcontinent.
680 - 696
Son.
753 - 973
Kirtivarman II is the last king of the Badami dynasty. He is defeated in      battle against the ambitious Dantidurga of the Rashtrakutas and western Chalukyan power is eclipsed for a period of 220 years. The dynasty is only revived in 973, as the Western Chalukyas .
Rashtrakuta Dynasty
AD 753 - 973
The Rashtrakutas (or Rashtrikas) were successors to the Chalukya dynasty of Badami in the      western-central Deccan plateau. Their      reign of over two centuries makes them one of the more notable dynasties in      the sub-continent. They started off as district heads for their Chalukya      masters, but soon become one of the most feared powers in the region. They      posed a threat to all their contemporaries, including their overlords, the      Chalukyas of Badami.
The word 'rashtra' in Sanskrit indicates      region and 'kuta' means chieftain, and the Rashtrakutas were officer-class      material of long standing. It seems that they were minor chieftains in      Central India prior to becoming a ruling dynasty. Their branches could be      found in Gujarat and Rajasthan. Later Rathod Rajputs claimed descent from      them, as did the Rattas of Soudatti (Karnataka).
(Information by Abhijit Rajadhyaksha.)
Chalukyan governor of Achalapura (Ellichpur) in Berar.
746 - 753
Dantidurga secures the power of the Rashtrakutras by eclipsing that of the Badami dynasty      of Chalukyas . After Vikramaditya II's      death, he attacks the Gurjara kingdom of Nandipuri, and then the Gurjara      Pratihara kingdom of Malwa. Buoyed by his success, he extends his authority      further over the eastern parts of Madhya Pradesh, all the while assiduously      avoided any conflict with his overlord. Kirtivarman II attacks him in 753      and is defeated, ending Chalukyan power.
753/754 - 756
Son, with a Chalukyan mother.
756 - 773
Son or uncle.
765
The Silharas of the South Konkan are handed the governance of the region by      Krishna I.
773 - 780
Dhruva Dharavarsha
Brother. Abdicated in favour of his son.
Dhruva manages to defeat Vatsaraja of the Pratihara dynasty in      Gujarat, leaving the Pratiharas      weakened and ripe for defeat by the Palas .
Kailashnath Temple at Ellora, not far from Aurangabad (in modern                  Maharashtra state), built between about 725-755
793 - 814
Son.
800
After defeating the Pala king, Nagabhata of the Pratiharas is himself subdued by Govinda III as the      Rashtrakuta king campaigns north. He then campaigns to the south, defeating      the antagonistic Eastern Chalukyas .      It is at this time that the Silharas of the North Konkan are handed the      governance of the region by Govinda III.
813
Upon the death of his father, Govinda III claims the throne, but has to      defeat a challenge by his elder brother, Stambha. Once defeated, Stambha      offers no further threat, and instead serves as a viceroy in southern      territories.
Stambha
Brother. Deposed.
936
Having lost much territory to the Eastern Chalukyas and made himself very      unpopular during his poor reign, Govinda is deposed by his own vassals and Amoghavarsha      is offered the throne.
936 - 939
Younger brother of Indra III. Came to the throne late in      life.
939 - 965
Son. Governed during his father's reign.
940
The Silharas of Kolhapur (southern Maharashtra) are handed regional      governance by Krishna III, and rule in the name of their overlord. Defeated      in Karnatka around this time, Krishna's forces are expelled from the Northern Kalachuri kingdom.
965
Despite waging numerous wars in order to recover the glory of the      Rashtrakutas and playing an important role in rebuilding the empire,     Krishna III is overthrown by Tailapa II of the newly resurgent Western      Chalukyas .
965 - 972
Brother.
972
The Paramara king, Siyaka II, plunders Manyakheta and Khottiga dies fighting      them. His nephew replaces him on the throne only to be killed almost      immediately by Tailapa II of the Western      Chalukyas .
972
Nephew. Ruled for only a few months.
973
Nephew of the vassal king of Talakad. Died 983.
973
Tailapa II re-establishes the Chalukya dynasty after a period of 220 years. He also defeats the      remnants of Rashtrakuta power by beating Indra IV and his vassal in the Godavari basin, Panchaladeva.      Indra ends his days in 982 by committing Sallekhana (fasting to death as      practised by Jain monks) at Shravanabelagola.
Western Chalukyas (Kalyani Chalukyas)
AD 973 - 1200
The Chalukyas revived their fortunes in 973 after two      centuries of decline while large swathes of India were under the control of      the Rashtrakutas . Tailapa II overthrew the Rashtrakuta king, Krishna III and      re-established the Chalukyan kingdom. He recovered most of the territory      which had previously belonged to the Chalukyas, and his revived empire came      to be known as the Western Chalukya dynasty. The Western Chalukyas ruled for      another 250 years and were in constant conflict with the Cholas , and their      own Chalukya cousins, the Eastern Chalukyas of Vengi.
(Information by Madhu Nimkar.)
Revived the Chalukya empire.
973
Tailapa II re-establishes the Chalukya dynasty after a period of 220 years.      He also defeats the remnants of Rashtrakuta power by beating Indra IV and his vassal in the Godavari basin, Panchaladeva.      he also beats off the Paramara king, Munja, with help from his ally,      the Yadava king Bhillama II.
980
The Cholas , experiencing a minor succession crisis, are momentarily      weakened, and Tailapa claims victory in a battle against their new king,      Uththama.
997 - 1008
Son.
c.1000 - c.1011
The Eastern Chalukya kingdom falls under the influence of the Chola ruler, Rajaraja, a fact that is not appreciated by Satyasraya. As a result, Vengi      becomes a bone of contention between the Cholas and the Chalukyas.      Satyasraya also suffers a rebellion by the client Silharas of North Konkan,      so he attacks the kingdom, his armies advancing right up to the capital at Rajapur.      He is less successful against the Silharas of Kolhapur, though, as they      defeat him and found a kingdom there.
1008 - 1015
The Chalukyas take direct control of the Silhara kingdom      of South Konkan and retake Kolhapur .
1023
The Ghaznavids of Afghanistan conquer the Punjab.
1042 - 1068
Somesvara I / Ahavamalla / Trilokamalla
Son.
Somesvara I is one of the greatest kings of the Western Chalukya dynasty.      During his reign he founds the city of Kalyani (modern Basavakalyana) and      moves his capital there. One of his queens is Hoysala Devi, a Hoysala princess.
The temple complex at Pattadakal reached the peak of its                  development under the Western Chalukya kings
1068 - 1076
Son. Deposed.
1070
The various regions which later form Bengal are brought together under the      control of the Sena dynasty.
1073 - 1075
Almost as soon as the weakened Eastern Chalukya kingdom has been restored      by King Vijayaditya, it is invaded by the Chedi king of Dahala,      Yasahkarnadeva. The kingdom is extinguished in 1075 and it seems that much      of its territory is absorbed by the Cholas for a time.
1076
Somesvara II is deposed by his more ambitious brother, Vikramaditya VI, who      is the greatest of the Western Chalukya kings and has the longest reign in      the dynasty. He earns the title 'Permadideva and Tribhuvanamalla' (lord of      three worlds). At his peak, Vikarmaditya controls a vast empire stretching      from the River Kaveri in southern India to the River Narmada in central      India.
1076 - 1126
Brother.
1076 - 1116
Kirtivarma of Hangal fights against the combined might of      the Kadambas of Goa and the     Chalukyas when he tries to extend his borders. Ultimately defeated, he ends      up becoming a vassal of the Chalukyas.
1088 - 1099
Vikramaditya conquers major portions of the former Eastern Chalukya kingdom, attaching it to his own great empire until      it is retaken by the Cholas in 1099.
1116 - 1123
The king's Hoysala ally, Vishnuvardhana, changes      sides and makes inroads into Chalukyan territory. Vikramaditya eventually      drives him out , and he submits in 1123.
1118 - c.1130
Vikramaditya manages to recapture the Eastern Chalukya lands and hold onto them until his death. Shortly after the      accession of his son, the territory is absorbed by the Chola empire.
1126 - 1138
Somesvara III
Son.
Somesvara III has to face a renewed invasion by the Hoysala king, Vishnuvardhana,      but is able to fend him off. He loses some territory as the Vengi Chalukyas tried to throw off his control, but he is still able to maintain most of the      vast empire left to him by his powerful father. However, his successors are      not as strong, and they oversee the gradual fading of the empire.
1138 - 1151
Jagadhekamalla II
Even though control over the Vengi Chalukyas has been lost, Jagadhekamalla is still able      to control the Hoysalas in the south and the Seuna and Paramara in the      north.
1151 - 1162
Tailapa III / Taila
1157
The Kakatiya king, Prolla II, defeats Tailapa III and takes him captive. This      results in other vassal states rising against the Chalukyas. The Seuna and the Hoysala start to take territory, and the Kalachuri king, Bijjala II, captures      the royal capital at Kalyani in 1157, forcing Tailapa III to flee to      Annigeri (in Dharwad district).
1162
Tailapa is killed by the Hoysala king, ViraNarasimha, virtually ending any      claims to overall power by the Chalukyas.
1163 - 1183
Jagadhekamalla III
Jagadhekamalla's rule is completely overshadowed by the emergence of the      Southern Kalachuri under Bijjala II who take control of Basavakalyana and      rule from there.
1184 - 1200
Last Western Chalukya ruler.
1185 - 1186
In 1185, the Yadava vassal ruler, Bhillama      V, shrugs off domination by the Western Chalukyas and declares the      independence of the Yadavas. The following year, Lahore is conquered by      the Ghurids who also inherit Pallava Punjab, ruling much of northern India.
1189
The people of the former territory of the Eastern Chalukyas are defeated by the Hoysalas and the Yadavas .
1200
Somesvara makes a short-lived attempt to revive the Chalukya kingdom by      defeating the waning Kalachuri kingdom. He manages to capture Basavakalyana      but fails to prevent the other vassal states, the Seuna , the Hoysalas , and the Kakatiya dynasty, from completely overwhelming the Chalukyan empire. In the      end, the three former vassal states divide the vast territory between the River Kaveri and the River Narmada      between themselves.
Early Modern States / Moghul Empire
The creation of the Delhi sultanate in 1206 began the creation of one of India's greatest empires, but      following the collapse of Moghul power      from 1707 onwards, the sub-continent fractured into a series of small      states, although such fractures had been appearing for some time anyway, especially      under Aurangzeb's rule. In fact, although the Moghuls ruled much of India,      they never entirely conquered it, and even vassal states were prone to fits      of independence.
1206
The Delhi sultanate is founded      by a slave of the Ghurid sultan, Mohammed III, following the defeat of the Hindu Rajputs of Amer who      had governed much of the region in 1194. The      sultanate begins in Lahore, but subsequent rulers extend their territory eastwards and Delhi      quickly becomes the capital. Under later      rulers, especially the Moghuls , the      sultanate rises to become one of the greatest empires in Indian history,      subjugating almost the entire sub-continent. Minor states or independent      cities also proliferate throughout India, including those of Jodhpur and Mewar .
1221
The Indus Valley      is under the Mongols .
1336
Tughlaq power fails to      retain control of the Deccan and southern India, and two brothers, Harihara      (Hakka) I and Bukka Raya, take the opportunity to lay the foundations of the Vijaynagar empire in the south. They conquer many of the regional kingdoms,      such as Hoysala , Shambuvaraya, and the Reddis.
1490
The Bahamani sultanate on the Deccan begins to fracture and break up, devolving      into a series of states which includes Ahmednagar , Berar , Bidar , Bijapur ,      and Golconda .
1498
The Portuguese explorer, Vasco de Gama, reaches India by sea, and traders      follow close behind him, marking the first lasting contact between India and      Europe since the time of Alexander the Great. The Vijaynagar empire in      southern India is especially affected when many of its ports are seized by      the Portuguese.
1505 - 1510
The first Portuguese viceroy of India is appointed. Goa is made the capital      of Portugal's  empire in the east in 1510.
1526
Most of India      is ruled or controlled by the Moghuls from Delhi. Some small states attempt to re-establish their independence      during rebellions or uprisings, but on the whole these are crushed by the      Moghul emperors.
1565
The Vijayanagar      empire in the far south is defeated at the Battle of Talikota by an alliance of the Deccan sultanates which had only recently been born out of the break-up of the Bahamani sultanate.
1646
After years of attacks and being repulsed, the Vijaynagar empire is finally      conquered by the sultanates of Bijapur and Golconda . Many of the empire's      largest vassal states immediately declare independence, so the territorial      gains made by the sultanates are limited. Those vassals, Mysore, Keladi      Nayaka, and the Nayaks and Nayakas of Chitradurga, Gingee, Madurai, and      Tanjore, all become powerful states in southern India.
1707
Following the fractious reign of Emperor Aurangzeb, the Moghul empire      gradually collapses, with many small states regaining their independence and      new states appearing for the first time. These include Bengal , Hyderabad ,      and Oudh , along with the Maratha empire and the many Maratha subsidiary states.
The      arrival of the British sees these states slowly being conquered or forced to submit to the new      political power in the subcontinent.
1746 - 1748
The War of the Austrian Succession is a wide-ranging conflict that encompasses      the North American King George's War, two Silesian Wars, the War of Jenkins'      Ear, and involves most of the crowned heads of Europe in deciding the      question of whether Maria Theresa can succeed as archduke of Austria and,      perhaps even more importantly, as Holy Roman Emperor .      Austria is supported by Britain , the Netherlands ,      the Savoyard kingdom of Sardinia , and Saxony (after an early switchover), but opposed by an opportunistic Prussia and France ,      who had raised the question in the first place to disrupt Habsburg control      of central Europe, backed up by Bavaria and Sweden (briefly). Spain joins the war in an unsuccessful attempt to restore possessions lost to Austria      in 1715.
The War of Jenkins' Ear pitches Britain against Spain between 1739-1748. The   Russo-Swedish War, or Hats' Russian War, is the Swedish attempt to regain territory lost to Russia in 1741-1743. King George's War is fought between Britain and France in the French Colonies in 1744-1748. The First Carnatic War of 1746-1748 involves the struggle for dominance   in India by France and Britain. Henry Pelham, leader of the English government in Parliament ,      is successful in ending the war, achieving peace with France and trade with Spain      through the Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle. Austria is ultimately successful, losing      only Silesia to Prussia.
British Governors-General in India / East India Company
AD 1766 - 1858
In January 1757, the sultan of Bengal captured Calcutta, which      contained the headquarters of the British East India Company. However, the     British general, Robert Clive, had allies within Bengal who helped to defeat and dethrone      the sultan at and after the Battle of Plassey      on 23 June respectively.
The East India Company was now the effective master of Bengal      through the Bengal presidency, which was  established  between      1765-1766, and then the position of governor-general which effectively ruled      all East India Company possessions in the sub-continent. However, the intention      of the company at this stage was      still only to improve trade with India rather than creating an empire.      Governor-generals of the East India Company are shown in green.
1765 - 1772
Robert Clive, or 'Clive of India' secures British rule in Bengal with the first      and most powerful of its 'presidencies', and makes the East India Company an      extremely powerful player in Indian politics between these dates.
The statue of Robert Clive (1725-1774) on Horse Guards Parade in                  London
1772
Two years after the Bengal famine      claims millions of lives, Calcutta is named as the capital of British India by the East India Company, and the first governor-general      is appointed. This marks the official start of British governance in areas      of India, although some historians use the aftermath of the Battle of      Plassey in 1757 as the start.
In the same year, the Company invades Bhutan and captures the capital,      ending the Bhutanese threat to Koch Bihar . A peace settlement is negotiated      in 1774 but the agreement means that Koch Bihar is subject to Company dictates      which gradually replace the authority of the kings in the quest to improve      the region's infrastructure and the rule of law.
1773 - 1785
First governor-general of British-administered India.
1775 - 1782
The First Maratha War takes place against the      East India Company. The empire becomes a looser confederacy, with political power      resting in a 'pentarchy' of five Maratha dynasties: the Peshwas in Pune, the Sindhias (originally the Shindes), the     Holkars of Indore , the     Bhonsles of Nagpur , and      the Gaekwads of Baroda.
1778
After being visited by a deputation of American diplomats, Benjamin Franklin      and Silas Deane, France declares war on Britain in support of the rebellion in North America, only too glad to      make the most of Britain's misfortune. In India, Hastings is forced to lend      his troops to a local ruler in order to crush an uprising which, if it could      succeed, would threaten Bengal itself and the East India Company's      headquarters in Calcutta. The French fleet encourages rebellion against      British interests, and French intriguing in India continues until the end of      the American War of Independence.
1786 - 1793
Oversaw the reduction of the East India army.
1798 - 1805
Brother of Prime Minister Wellington. Later Lord Lt of Ireland .
1802 - 1805
A situation of near civil war exists when two Maratha generals start fighting      between themselves. The Peshwa , Baji Rao II, chooses sides but it is the other side that ultimately      triumphs, and Baji Rao flees to Bombay in September 1802 to seek help from the British .      The East India Company fights the Second Maratha War against the infuriated Sindhias and the Bhosales      of Nagpur but both are defeated by the      British, principally under General Arthur Wellesley, younger brother of the      governor-general, who fine-tunes the skills that will later see him win the      Peninsula War in Spain .
1805
Lord Minto. Former viceroy of Corsica (1794-1796).
1807 - 1809
Maharaja Ranjit Singh of Lahore, the first Sikh king, annexes both Kot Kapura and Faridkot to his kingdom (much of which is      given as a jagir to Diwan Mokam Chand). With British help, Gulab Singh      regains Faridkot in 1809. In that same year, Sahib Singh of Patiala enters into a treaty with the British      against Ranjit Singh.
1809
Afghan king, Shah Shuja, signs a treaty with the British which includes a clause stating that he will oppose the passage of foreign      troops through his territories. This agreement is the first Afghan pact with      a European power, and it stipulates the undertaking of joint action if there      is any Franco - Persian aggression against Afghan or British dominions.
1813 - 1823
First marquis of Hastings.
1817 - 1819
The Third Maratha War results in a decisive victory for the British against the Peshwa . The      last peshwa, Baji Rao II, is defeated, and the Maratha empire is largely      annexed, bound by treaty to the British Crown. The kingdoms of Indore , Gwalior , Nagpur , and Jhansi      became princely states, acknowledging British control.
1818
British rule of Orissa commences when Mukundadeva II of the Bhoi dynasty      of kings is imprisoned by the East India Company. The Bhoi family      thereafter becomes the supervisors of the Jaggannatha temple at      Puri.
1820
The General Maritime Treaty is signed in January between the rulers of Abu      Dhabi, Ajman, Sharjah, and Umm al-Quwain on the one hand and Britain on the other. The island state of Bahrain ,      lying close to these other Arabic states, accedes to the treaty in the      following February. The treaty prohibits piracy in the Persian Gulf,      bans slavery, and requires all usable ships to be registered with British      forces. It is designed to secure the lines of communication between Britain      and India.
1823 - 1828
The Afghans lose Sindh permanently to the British in India.
1824
William Moorecroft, of the East India Company,      arrives in Peshawar, Afghanistan , while en route to Bukhara , east of Khiva (and now      in Uzbekistan ), to      trade for horses. He is killed in Balkh while returning to India.
1828 - 1835
William Bentinck
1830
The last of the Kachari kings of Assam dies without a heir and the East India Company      annexes the kingdom under the details of its Doctrine of Lapse.
1835
The Jayantiya kingdom in Assam is annexed by the East India Company. The capital at Jaintiapur is abandoned and quickly falls into ruin. Only the Ahom kings survive in Assam.
1836 - 1842
First earl of Auckland.
1838
Assam is converted into a principality by the British East India Company, ending the rule of the last remaining independent Assam      kings, the Ahoms.
1839
Britain decides that Persian and Russian intrigues pose a threat to their control of India. To counter that perceived      threat, it is decided that Afghanistan will be used as a buffer state. A British army marches to      Kabul, triggering the First Anglo-Afghan War, which sees a native ruler used      as the British figurehead in the country.
1842 - 1844
Henry Hardinge
1844 - 1845
The Company annexes Sindh in 1844, and the Sikhs attack British divisions at Ferozepur. The First Anglo-Sikh War is triggered in 1845. The Sikhs fight      well, but eventually succumb to the disciplined British army following      betrayals by some of their Dogra generals.
1848 - 1856
First Marquis of Dalhousie.
1848 - 1855
The Maratha state of Kolhapur is absorbed by the British upon the death of the childless maharaja in 1848. Further Maratha states are      annexed in 1853 ( Nagpur ),      and 1855 ( Thanjavur ).      Also in 1848-1849, the Second Anglo-Sikh War commences when the Sikhs resent      excessive British interference in their affairs. There is help from Dost Mohammed      Khan, the Afghan king but, yet again due to internal dissensions, the Sikhs are defeated at Gujarat on 21 February      1849 and the Sikh kingdom is dissolved.
1855
Ghulam Muhammed Ghouse Khan      of Arcot fails to produce a male heir so, upon his death, his Carnatic kingdom      is annexed by the East India Company. The late nawab's uncle and former regent      is Azim Jah. In 1867 he is granted the title 'Prince of Arcot' in compensation      for the loss of the state.
1856 - 1858
Elevated to Viceroy in 1858.
1857 - 1858
The Indian Mutiny      (or Great Sepoy Rebellion) against British rule erupts      among East India Company native army units at Meerut, near Delhi, but after some hard fighting in places it is suppressed,      with Sikh soldiers fighting alongside the British.      The mutiny ends with the recapture of Delhi by troops loyal to the East      India Company. The last Moghul emperor is deposed,      as is the Maratha Peshwa , and the British Parliament places India under the direct     control of the empire's Viceroys ,      whilst subject or allied princes rule various vassal      states.
British Viceroys of India
AD 1858 - 1947
The British Parliament 's      India Act of 1784 established dual control of the East India Company , and centralised      British rule in India by reducing the power of the governors of Bombay (now Mumbai)      and Madras, and increasing that of the governor-general. After the British government had to interpose directly to end the Indian Mutiny, or rebellion,      the Crown took control of the Indian possessions and ended the East India Company's rule.      Many of the princely states were annexed by Britain, including Hyderabad and Oudh , although local rulers      were maintained on their thrones.
1856 - 1862
Britain separates Burma from      India.
1943 - 1947
Last viceroy.
1947 - 1948
The post of viceroy (sub-king, or commander in the king's name) of India      is downgraded to that of governor-general of India upon the eve of      independence. Following the handover by Britain ,      native governor-generals are appointed by their respective governments.
A Direct Action day is called in 1947 by the Muslim parties (led by Muhammed      Ali Jinnah) who are demanding a separate homeland for Muslims. Hindus and Sikhs are massacred in Muslim-dominated areas, leading to a bloody Hindu      retaliation. large-scale riots follow and the decision is taken to partition      India and create the country of Pakistan as a homeland for Muslims in former      north-western India. The new country also gains the east of Bengal .
Modern India
AD 1947 - Present Day
The dominion of India was formed on 15 August 1947      following the official handover of power by the United Kingdom .      It is bordered to the north-west by Pakistan , to the north by China , Tibet, the      Himalayas and Nepal ,      to the north-east by Bhutan, to the east by Bangladesh and Burma , and to the      south-east by Sri Lanka. Initially it was under the guiding hand of a      governor-general, before coming under the control of a democratically      elected government.
The province of Bihar, once the ancient kingdom of Magadha , again became a state in its own right (more recently it has      been subdivided into Bihar and Jharkhand states). The princely states of Arcot , Bengal , and Hyderabad ,      the Jat kingdoms, and the Maratha kingdoms of      Baroda, Bundelkhand , Indore , Gwalior , Jhansi, Kolhapur , Nagpur , and Thanjavur were abolished, their territories      becoming part of India's system of states managed by governors. Twenty-two      princely states of Rajasthan, including Amer , Bikaner , Bundi , Mewar , Jaisalmer , Marwar & Jodhpur , merged to form the Union of Greater Rajasthan,      acknowledging the maharana of Udaipur in Mewar as their head.
1947 - 1948
Governor-general of India, 15 Aug-21 Jun.
1948 - 1950
Governor-general of India,      21 Jun-26 Jan. Last governor-general.
1949
Pakistani militia is repulsed by the Indian army, but due to UN      intervention part of Kashmir remains occupied by Pakistan , which it      names Azad Kashmir while India refers to it as Pakistan-occupied      Kashmir. The princely states of Junagadh (Gujarat) and Hyderabad (Andhra Pradesh), which have Muslim rulers but an overwhelming Hindu      population, are forced into India by the Indian home minister, Vallabhai      Patel. Pakistan becomes an Islamic republic, whereas India becomes a secular      republic (in 1950).
1950 - 1953
North Korea 's      forces attack South      Korea on 25 June 1950. A multinational force made up primarily of troops      from the USA , and Britain and the Commonwealth nations (including Australia, Canada , New      Zealand, and India), goes in to support the south. The Korean War lasts      until a ceasefire is agreed in July 1953.
1956
On 1 November, the state of Rajasthan comes into being. The former Rajasthan      rulers, which include those of Amer , Bikaner , Bundi , Jaisalmer , Malwa, Marwar & Jodhpur , and Mewar , give up their sovereignty but enjoy privy purses.
1961
After fourteen years of demonstrations and strikes in favour of independence from Portugal , the colony in Goa is invaded by the Indian army and taken by      force.
Indian national troops enter Goa
1962
A land dispute with China leads to      a Chinese invasion of India's border territories. Indian troops face a      humiliating defeat.
1965
Pakistan attacks India again over Kashmir, but is beaten back on several      fronts. With Soviet mediation Pakistan agrees to call off the attack.
1970 - 1971
The Indian Parliament decides to abolish the institution of royalty,      and the following year the rulers of the former princely states are      de-recognised and their privy purses and titles snatched away from them.
In the same year, the Indo- Pakistan War is triggered after Pakistan launches      a pre-emptive strike on eleven Indian airbases. The war lasts just thirteen      days. Following this, East Pakistan succeeds from West Pakistan to become Bangladesh .
1975
The eastern state of Sikkim (which is an Indian protectorate) merges into      India following a popular referendum.
1984
In order to weaken the power of the Akali political party in Punjab,      Congress encourages a Sikh fanatic demagogue called Jarnail Singh      Bhindrenwale. What follows is his secessionist movement for a separate Sikh      country named Khalistan. He unleashes a brutal terror campaign with includes      bomb blasts, Hindu killings, and the murders of pro-India journalists and      politicians, all with covert Pakistan i support. Bhindrenwale seeks refuge      the holy Golden Temple of Amritsar and virtually fortifies it, forcing the      enactment of Operation Bluestar by Indian troops. They storm the temple and      Bhindrenwale is killed. This act culminates into the assassination of Indira      Gandhi and the subsequent anti-Sikh riots of the same year.
1987 - 1990
India sends a peace-keeping force to maintain law and order in the      neighbouring Sri Lanka, which is in the middle of a civil war being fought      between the majority Sinhalese and the ethnic Sri Lankan Tamils who are led      by a revolutionary group called the LTTE.
1990 - 1991
The Indian peace-keeping force is recalled. The following year Rajiv Gandhi      is assassinated by the pro-Tamil LTTE. Congress returns to power and Narimha      Rao becomes the next prime minister.
1998 - 1999
India conducts nuclear tests amidst reports of a secret  Pakistani nuclear      programme which is supported by the Chinese . The      following year, Pakistan launches an operation in Kargil (supposedly to      internationalise the issue of Kashmir) after its soldiers occupy some      unmanned border posts disguised as irregulars. The Indian army successfully      repulses the attacks and reoccupies the posts. The USA intervenes and Pakistan is compelled to call back its men.
2008
Pakistan is generally accepted to be the source of a terrorist attack on the      city of Mumbai (formerly Bombay). Islamic terrorists rampage through the      city, killing hundreds of people including several foreign nationals. The      Pakistani state is accused of sponsoring the terrorists, all but one of      which are      killed.  