Mar
APR
May
17
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
17 Apr 16 - 17 Apr 16
Close Help
Skip to content
trithesean minds
Unlock the Door to Knowledge
Primary Menu
Home
About
Search for:
Recent Posts
The Cheras
The Pandyas
The  Chola Empire
Chalukya Dynasty
Pallava Dynasty
Recent Comments
Malana on The Chola Empire…
Malana on The Pandyas
oceanus11 on The Cheras
Thadeus on The Pandyas
oceanus11 on The Pandyas
Archives
March 2016
February 2016
January 2016
December 2015
November 2015
October 2015
June 2015
Categories
History of India
Uncategorized
Meta
Register
Log in
Entries RSS
Comments RSS
WordPress.com
Chalukya Dynasty
Posted on
February 18, 2016
by Malana
Introduction about Chalukya Dynasty 
The chalukya dynasty was a very popular dynasty. It was a royal dynasity that ruled southern and central India through the 6th to the 12th century. During this period, they ruled as three related, but individual dynasties.The earliest dynasty known as the Badmi Chalukyas ruled from Vatapi (modern Badami) from the middle of the 6th century.  In 550 Pulakesi I established the Chalukya dynasty. He took Vatapi (Badami in Bagalkot district, Karnataka) under his control and made it his capital.The Badami Chalukyas began to assert their independence at the decline of the Kadamba kingdom of Banavasi and rapidly rose to prominence during the reign of Pulakesi II (609 – 642) C.E. After the death of Pulakesi II, the Eastern Chalukyas became an independent kingdom in the eastern Deccan. They ruled from their capital Vengi until about the 11th century. In the western Deccan, the rise of the Rashtrakutas in the middle of 8th century eclipsed the Chalukyas of Badami before being revived by their descendants, the Western Chalukyas, in late 10th century. These Western Chalukyas ruled from Kalyani (modern Basavakalyan) till the end of the 12th century.During the rule of the Chalukyas it was known as the Golden Age.
Development 
The political atmosphere in South India shifted from smaller kingdoms to large empires with the ascendancy of Badami Chalukyas. For the first time, a South Indian kingdom took control and consolidated the entire region between the Kaveri and the Narmada rivers. The rise of this empire saw the birth of efficient administration, overseas trade and commerce and the development of new style of architecture called “Chalukyan architecture”. Kannada literature, which had enjoyed royal support in the 9th century Rashtrakuta court found eager patronage from the Western Chalukyas in the Jain and Veerashaiva traditions. The 11th century saw the birth of Telugu literature under the patronage of the Eastern Chalukyas.
en.wikipedia.org
Extent of Badami Chalukya Empire
Capital: Vatapi
Languages: Kannada, Sanskrit, Telugu
Religion: Hinduism, Jainism
Government: Monarchy, Maharaja
Architecture 
The Chalukya’s were one of the best dynasties for making  architecture. The Chalukya’s Architecture is known as The Chalukyan Architecture. These people created palaces,temples,workshops,carving and statues. These people made over 100 buildings. They also made some caves that were temples located in Badmi. The building material they used was red-golden sandstone that was common.
The Chalukyas were very organized with what they did. Such as the army they were in very good formation. The Chalukyas Army had about a hundred elephants in battle they had a very powerful Navy.This society also had kings and governments.
http://www.indianetzone.com/56/badami_chalukya_architecture.htm
Religion
The rule of the Badami Chalukya was a period of religious development. Initially they followed Vedic Hindusim. Pattadakal is the location of their grandest architecture. The worship of Lajja Gauri, the fertility goddess was equally popular. They enthusiastically encouraged Jainsm and confirmed to by one of the Badami cave temples and other Jain temples in the Aihole complex.
Decline
Pulakesi II extended the Chalukya Empire up to the northern extents of the Pallava kingdom and halted the southward march of Harsha by defeating him on the banks of the river Narmada. He then defeated the Vishnukundins in the southeastern Deccan. Pallava Narasimhavarman however reversed this victory by attacking and occupying the Chalukya capital Vatapi (Badami).
The Badami Chalukya dynasty went in to a brief decline following the death of Pulakesi II due to internal feuds. It recovered during the reign of Vikramaditya I, who succeeded in pushing the Pallavas out of Badami and restoring order to the empire. The empire reached a peak during the rule of the illustrious Vikramaditya II who defeated the Pallava Nandivarman II and captured Kanchipuram.
After the rise of the Rashtrakutas the Chalukyas of Badami went in to an eclipse to be recovered in the tenth century C.E. by Tailapa II (973 – 997) C.E. These later Chalukyas ruled from Kalyani. They were in constant conflict with the Imperial Cholas over the control of the Eastern Chalukya kingdom of Vengi. The Western Chalukyan power finally succumbed to the Hoysalas and Yadavas after almost three hundred years of glory. Somesvara IV (1184 – 1200 C.E.) was the last known Chalukyan ruler.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulakeshin_II
 
Illustrated By:  http://historyofindia-madhunimkar.blogspot.com/2009/09/chalukya-dynasties.html  &  https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chalukya_dynasty
Share this:
Twitter
Facebook
Google
Like this:
Like Loading...
Related
Categories: Uncategorized
2 thoughts on “Chalukya Dynasty”
Thadeus says:
February 26, 2016 at 3:49 pm
Interesting facts!
Like Like
Reply
oceanus11 says:
March 6, 2016 at 4:48 pm
Excellent wording I particularly like the fast facts!
Like Like
Reply
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
Post navigation
← Previous Post
Next Post →
Blog at WordPress.com. | The Intergalactic Theme .
Follow
Follow “trithesean minds”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Build a website with WordPress.com
%d bloggers like this: