NOV
APR
OCT
17
2015
2016
2017
8 captures
6 Sep 15 - 10 Oct 16
Close Help
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
Chalukya dynasty
Article
Web sites
Indian dynasties
Written by: The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica
SHARE
Read
View History
Edit
Feedback
Alternative title: Calukya dynasty
Chalukya dynasty, Chalukya also spelled Calukya, either of two ancient Indian dynasties.
The Western Chalukyas ruled as emperors in the Deccan (i.e., peninsular India) from 543 to 757 ce and again from about 975 to about 1189.
The Eastern Chalukyas ruled in Vengi (in eastern Andhra Pradesh state) from about 624 to about 1070.
Pulakeshin I, a petty chieftain of Pattadakal in the Bijapur district whose reign began in 543, took and fortified the hill fort of Vatapi (modern Badami ) and seized control of the territory between the Krishna and Tungabhadra rivers and the Western Ghats .
After military successes farther north, his son Kirtivarman I (reigned 566–597) secured the valuable Konkan coast.
The family then turned its attention to the fertile coastal regions to the northwest and east of the peninsula.
Pulakeshin II (reigned c. 610–642) acquired parts of Gujarat and Malwa and defied the north Indian ruler Harsa of Kannauj; the boundary between them was fixed on the Narmada River .
About 624, Pulakeshin II took the kingdom of Vengi from the Vishnukundins and gave it to his brother Kubja Vishnuvardhana, the first Eastern Chalukya ruler.
In 641–647 the Pallavas ravaged the Deccan and captured Vatapi, but the Chalukya family recovered by 655 and extended its power in Gujarat.
By 660 they had acquired land in Nellore district.
Vikramaditya I (reigned 655–680) took Kanchipuram (ancient Kanci), at that time of the Pallava dynasty , about 670.
Another Chalukya ruler, Vikramaditya II (reigned 733–746), again captured, but spared, the city, in 742.
His successor, Kirtivarman II, was replaced by the Rashtrakuta dynasty in 757.
When the last Rashtrakuta fell, about 975, Taila founded the second Western Chalukya dynasty, named for the more central capital, Kalyani.
His great achievement was to subdue the Paramara dynasty of Malwa.
The Chola king Rajaraja I invaded the south Deccan about 993, and repeated Chola invasions of the plateau occurred until about 1021.
After many vicissitudes the Chalukya dynasty was supplanted by the Kalacuri family under Bijjala, who usurped the throne about 1156 and reigned until 1167.
The Chalukya dynasty was restored in the person of Someshvara IV, who, however, lost the empire in 1189 to the Yadavas (or Sevunas) of Devagiri, the Hoysalas of Dorasamudra, and the Kakatiyas of Warangal—the rulers of the Telugu -speaking parts of the Deccan.
The descendants of Kubja Vishnuvardhana had to constantly fight for the riches of Vengi and were pawns in the struggle between the Chalukya Deccan emperors and the Chola kings.
The Cholas eventually adopted the Chalukya family, and the two countries were united under Kulottunga I (Rajendra II), whose reign began in 1070.
Comments
Share
SHARE
Email
Print
Cite
Keep exploring
Early Aviation
A Study of Poems: Fact or Fiction?
Islam
Editor Picks: 9 Queer Writers You Should Read
7 Nobel Prize Scandals
What made you want to look up Chalukya dynasty?
To
From
Subject
Comments
(Please limit to 900 characters)
Cancel
Britannica Stories
In The News / Health & Medicine
Zika Proven to Cause Microcephaly
Demystified / Geography
Is "Holland" the Same Place as "the Netherlands"?
Spotlight / History
The Unsinkable Titanic
See All Stories
BRITANNICA QUIZZES
Canines vs. Felines
Africa’s Physical Features
Cervantes
See More Quizzes
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
©2016 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Citations
MLA style:
"Chalukya dynasty".
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016.
Web.
17 Apr. 2016
<http://www.britannica.com/topic/Chalukya-dynasty>.
APA style:
Chalukya dynasty.
(2016).
In Encyclopædia Britannica.
Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/topic/Chalukya-dynasty
Harvard style:
Chalukya dynasty.
2016.
Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Retrieved 17 April, 2016, from http://www.britannica.com/topic/Chalukya-dynasty
Chicago Manual of Style:
Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "Chalukya dynasty", accessed April 17, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/topic/Chalukya-dynasty.
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Update
Link
Click anywhere inside the article to add text or insert superscripts, subscripts, and special characters.
You can also highlight a section and use the tools in this bar to modify existing content:
Add links to related Britannica articles!
You can double-click any word or highlight a word or phrase in the text below and then select an article from the search box.
Or, simply highlight a word or phrase in the article, then enter the article name or term you'd like to link to in the search box below, and select from the list of results.
Note: we do not allow links to external resources in editor.
Please click the Web sites link for this article to add citations for
external Web sites.
Editing Tools:
Tips for Editing
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles.
You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind:
Encyclopaedia Britannica articles are written in a neutral, objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context.
(Internet URLs are best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval.
Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
MEDIA FOR:
Chalukya dynasty
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email.
Try again later.
Or click Continue to submit anonymously:
Continue