Mormons and the Donner Party (America, church, LDS, quote)
User Name
[ Register ]
Please register to participate in our discussions with 1.5 million other members - it's free and quick!
Some forums can only be seen by registered members.
After you create your account , you'll be able to customize options and access all our 15,000 new posts/day with fewer ads.
View detailed profile ( Advanced ) or search
site with
3,420 posts, read 2,099,080 times
Reputation: 960
Advertisements
A question for our learned Mormon posters here at C-D:  does the LDS Church hold any special appreciation for the Donner Party, the group of "settlers" who crossed the continent in 1846 on a journey to the "Great West?"
The Donners are of course most famous for getting snow-bound in the Sierra mountain in California and resorting to cannibalism to survive as they wintered down in the snow.
(Quick disclosure: my thread is not to talk about cannibalism, as this obviously has nothing to do with Mormons).
We know that the Donner Party spent 30 days in the Wasatch Mountains, just east of present day Saly lake City, cutting a very difficult trail through the mountains to get their wagons through.
We also know that the Mormons, the very next Spring, followed this cut trail through the Wasatch, immediately before arriving to the Great Salt Plain that spread out before them.
Apparently Bringham Young liked the location!
So do Mormons teach anything about the Donners in their sunday school classes?
Are there any monuments at the big LDS church in SLC?
What's the relation?
Quote:
Originally Posted by theflipflop
A question for our learned Mormon posters here at C-D: does the LDS Church hold any special appreciation for the Donner Party, the group of "settlers" who crossed the continent in 1846 on a journey to the "Great West?"
The Donners are of course most famous for getting snow-bound in the Sierra mountain in California and resorting to cannibalism to survive as they wintered down in the snow.
(Quick disclosure: my thread is not to talk about cannibalism, as this obviously has nothing to do with Mormons).
We know that the Donner Party spent 30 days in the Wasatch Mountains, just east of present day Saly lake City, cutting a very difficult trail through the mountains to get their wagons through.
We also know that the Mormons, the very next Spring, followed this cut trail through the Wasatch, immediately before arriving to the Great Salt Plain that spread out before them.
Apparently Bringham Young liked the location!
So do Mormons teach anything about the Donners in their sunday school classes?
Are there any monuments at the big LDS church in SLC?
What's the relation?
All I really know about the Mormon connection to the Donner party is that a group of men who were part of the Mormon Battalion was among those to rescue those who had survived the ordeal and to provide a proper burial for those who didn't.
I'm sure that pioneer histories have more to say on the subject, but it really isn't mentioned frequently.
Brigham Young was almost certainly appreciative of having a trail to follow to the Great Basin, however he also knew exactly where he was headed when he first set out with the first group of pioneers.
The vanguard group totalled 149 people.
Within a few years, 70,000 had followed.
Last edited by Katzpur; 03-30-2012 at 10:53 AM.
.
Quote:
Originally Posted by Katzpur
All I really know about the Mormon connection to the Donner party is that a group of men who were part of the Mormon Battalion were part of the party sent to rescue those who had survived the ordeal and to provide a proper burial for those who didn't.
I'm sure that pioneer histories have more to say on the subject, but it really isn't mentioned frequently.
Brigham Young was almost certainly appreciative of having a trail to follow to the Great Basin, however he also knew exactly where he was headed when he first set out with the first group of pioneers.
The vanguard group totalled 149 people.
Within a few years, 70,000 had followed.
I agree with what Katzpur said.
Location: Sinking in the Great Salt Lake
12,252 posts, read 14,056,366 times
Reputation: 12554
I remember reading some journal entries from the Donner Party where they commented on how beautiful the Salt Lake Valley was, and that they briefly considered staying before deciding it was the too far out in the middle of nowhere.
The Donners did cut the same trail through Emmigration Canyon that millions of Mormon pioneers used to access the valley though, and I'm sure the Pioneers were greatful for it.
Still, it's not like the Mormons wouldn't have made it to Salt Lake Valley (or even been really delayed by it for more than a few days) without the Donners though.
The Mormon pioneers were incredibly fast and efficient workers who managed to completely settle the area from Boise to Las Vegas, build hundreds of towns and a vast, completely self-sufficient economy from the ground up in only 20 years.
That's probably why there aren't Mormon hymns and monuments dedicated to the Donners.
215 posts, read 383,756 times
Reputation: 186
I grew up near the mouth of Emigration Canyon.
I don't know if that is why I learned about the Donner Party early on in my life, but I was always told they saved the Brigham Young party much needed time.
I knew this much earlier than I ever knew about their trouble in CA.
The mormon pioneers were already late in the year to plant any crops and they would need those crops to survive that first winter.
Though the first group of mormons was fairly small (only about 150) there was a much larger group (of about 2000) who arrived in Sept (I think, going on memory here).
Because the Donner Party had already cut the trail through the canyon it helped that first group to get through quickly enough to get established in time to help support the others coming later that same year.
There is a road over the hill they came down called Donner Way.
And the first condos built on it were called the Donner apts.
Very nice condo area actually now.
Originally Posted by InSandy
Katzpur, I guess you didn't get the sunday school field trip there
Well I'm a Yid, and I took the same trip to the same location - but mine was driven out of my interest for the Donner Party, not the Morman church.
I was taken aback, when you suddenly crest a hill and see all of the Salt lake basin laying before you.
The Mormons must have been taken aback as well.
If I'm not mistaken, Bringham Young was actually heading to Yerba Buena, CA (the eventual site for the city of San Francisco), where there was already a small growing Mormon population who had arrived there by sailing around the tip of South America.
Quote:
Originally Posted by Chango
You would be mistaken.
They knew about the Salt Lake Valley and intended to settle there from the begining (or at least as soon as they decided to leave Nauvoo.)
Cool with me.
I just recall reading that somewhere.
Facts are always better coming from the source (a Mormon, in this case).
Let me re-state that, as I think it's the most commonly ignored concept here at the C/D forum:
Quote:
Facts are always better coming from the source
Please register to post and access all features of our very popular forum.
It is free and quick.
Over $68,000 in prizes has already been given out to active posters on our forum.
Additional giveaways are planned.
Detailed information about all U.S. cities, counties, and zip codes on our site: City-data.
com .
Page 1 of 2