Donner, Party of One: Your Close-Up Is Ready!
The wintery scene opens in a high alpine setting; it’s mid-December and supplies have run extremely low.
The rapid succession of snowstorms has limited access to the outside world.
Even the toughest mountaineers feel trapped in the unforgiving terrain, that seems to be closing in by the minute.
While some Leadville residents might call this Tuesday in winter, for the producers of a new 2-hour documentary about the infamous Donner party, it’s the scene that screams “Open Call” for Leadville extras and local talent.
Think Factory Media will be filming this Weather Channel Documentary in Leadville from March 8 thru March 21.
The company choose Leadville, because as the Highest City in North America, it was most likely to have the necessary snow for the storyline.
The film company is also hiring some local folks.
Here’s how you can become involved:
DOCUMENTARY STAFFING
Looking for a few assistants to help in our Production and Art departments.
We will be filming in Leadville.
Dates will be roughly 3/8 – 3/21 (2 weeks total: 1 week for prep, 1 week shoot and wrap).
Documentary is about the Donner Party.
PRODUCTION ASSISTANTS
Looking for hard working people that are local to Leadville that have their own vehicles, trucks are a plus.
Must be familiar with the Leadville and surrounding areas.
Responsibilities will include, but not limited to: Setting up and maintaining the local production office, driving crew and cast to and from the airport and set, driving to various vendors for pick-ups, setting up crafty, loading and unloading gear, assisting Assistant Directors wrangle cast, assists various departments daily, and assisting with returns upon completion of filming.
Must have a clean driving record and comfortable driving in winter conditions.
Will need to pass a background check.
If you own and/or can operate a snow mobile, please let us know.
Workdays will be 12 hours.
Must be 21+.
ART ASSISTANTS
Looking for hard working people that are local to Leadville that have their own vehicles, trucks are a plus.
Must be familiar with the Leadville and surrounding areas.
Responsibilities will be to assist the Art Department.
Some tasks will include, but not limited to: loading and unloading props and art materials, driving to pick up Art supplies, help to reconstruct cabins and lean-tos (cabins will be built off site and reassembled on set), and assist our Set Decorator, Prop Master, and Production Designer with daily needs.
The majority of your work will be outside.
Previous experience, working with tools and ability to drive a 26-feet truck is a plus.
Must have a clean driving record and comfortable driving in winter conditions.
Will need to pass a background check.
If you own and/or can operate a snow mobile, please let us know.
Workdays will be 12 hours.
Must be 21+.
ACTORS/EXTRAS
Sounds like they’re already secured a majority of their actors from a Vail Theater Company, but they are still looking for a few more.
Get discovered!
CONTACT
Mayen Ma, Supervising Producer, Thinkfactory Media.
Office (310) 473-0900, cell: 718-344-1626 r email: mma@thinkfactorymedia.com.
Or locally, call Kim at the Leadville Workforce Center.
719-486-2426.