Apr
MAY
Jun
11
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
11 May 16 - 11 May 16
Close Help
Leadville Today
Leadville news and information source covering Leadville and Lake County, Colorado
Skip to content
Home
Calendar
April 2016
August 2016
December 2016
January 2016
July 2016
June 2016
May 2016
November 2016
October 2016
September 2016
Churches
Temple Israel
Government
In The ‘Ville
More – In The ‘Ville
Independence Pass
Passing Names – In The ‘Ville
Leadville Life
Breaking News – May 3
Breaking News – May 4
Breaking News – May 7
Obituaries
Local Business
Politics
Election 2015 – Lake County Results
Recreation
Schools
Services
Sports
Leadville Ski Joring
Leadville Ski Joring Results 2015
Skyline Baseball – Leadville Today
Volunteer
Who We Are/Contact Us
Tag Archives: Leadville Weather Channel Donner Documentary
Latest News – March 3
Posted on March 3, 2015 | Leave a comment
Public Safety Community Meeting TONIGHT at 6 p.m.
Are you concerned about recent Public Safety issues in Leadville and Lake County?
Well, it’s time to talk about it and get some answers.
And (thankfully), as usual, it’s a group of concerned citizens who are getting the job done.
TONIGHT Tuesday, March 3, there will be a Public Safety meeting at the “Old Movie Theater” in the R.J. McGregor Building at 115 W. 6th Street.
The program starts at 6 p.m.
According to the citizen-activist organizers, there will be a facilitator at the meeting who will be asking questions from the audience and some submitted from the community, to a local panel, including law enforcement.
The conversation will primarily focus on several recent cases and incidents that have increased concerns about Public Safety from the Leadville and Lake County community.
According to the citizen’s group, the panel will consist of “The Chief of Police, The Sheriff, A SANE Nurse, A local Therapist, An Advocate and our District Attorney.”
Donner, Party of One: Your Close-Up Is Ready!
The wintery scene opens in a high alpine setting; it’s mid-December and supplies have run extremely low.
The rapid succession of snowstorms has limited access to the outside world.
Even the toughest mountaineers feel trapped in the unforgiving terrain, that seems to be closing in by the minute.
While some Leadville residents might call this Tuesday in winter, for the producers of a new 2-hour documentary about the infamous Donner party, it’s the scene that screams “Open Call” for Leadville extras and local talent.
Think Factory Media will be filming this Weather Channel Documentary in Leadville from March 8 thru March 21.
The company choose Leadville, because as the Highest City in North America, it was most likely to have the necessary snow for the storyline.
The film company is also hiring some local folks.
Here’s how you can become involved:
DOCUMENTARY STAFFING
Looking for a few assistants to help in our Production and Art departments.
We will be filming in Leadville.
Dates will be roughly 3/8 – 3/21 (2 weeks total: 1 week for prep, 1 week shoot and wrap).
Documentary is about the Donner Party.
PRODUCTION ASSISTANTS
Looking for hard working people that are local to Leadville that have their own vehicles, trucks are a plus.
Must be familiar with the Leadville and surrounding areas.
Responsibilities will include, but not limited to: Setting up and maintaining the local production office, driving crew and cast to and from the airport and set, driving to various vendors for pick-ups, setting up crafty, loading and unloading gear, assisting Assistant Directors wrangle cast, assists various departments daily, and assisting with returns upon completion of filming.
Must have a clean driving record and comfortable driving in winter conditions.
Will need to pass a background check.
If you own and/or can operate a snow mobile, please let us know.
Workdays will be 12 hours.
Must be 21+.
ART ASSISTANTS
Looking for hard working people that are local to Leadville that have their own vehicles, trucks are a plus.
Must be familiar with the Leadville and surrounding areas.
Responsibilities will be to assist the Art Department.
Some tasks will include, but not limited to: loading and unloading props and art materials, driving to pick up Art supplies, help to reconstruct cabins and lean-tos (cabins will be built off site and reassembled on set), and assist our Set Decorator, Prop Master, and Production Designer with daily needs.
The majority of your work will be outside.
Previous experience, working with tools and ability to drive a 26-feet truck is a plus.
Must have a clean driving record and comfortable driving in winter conditions.
Will need to pass a background check.
If you own and/or can operate a snow mobile, please let us know.
Workdays will be 12 hours.
Must be 21+.
ACTORS/EXTRAS
Sounds like they’re already secured a majority of their actors from a Vail Theater Company, but they are still looking for a few more.
Get discovered!
CONTACT
Mayen Ma, Supervising Producer, Thinkfactory Media.
Office (310) 473-0900, cell: 718-344-1626 r email:  mma@thinkfactorymedia.com .
Or locally, call Kim at the Leadville Workforce Center.
719-486-2426.
ABOUT THE DONNER PARTY:
According to Wikipedia:
“The Donner Party was a group of American pioneers who set out for California in a wagon train.
Delayed by a series of mishaps, they spent the winter of 1846–47 snowbound in thevSierra Nevadas.
Some of the migrants resorted to cannibalism to survive, eating those who had succumbed to starvation and sickness.
The journey west usually took between five and six months, but the Donner Party was slowed by following a new route called Hastings Cutoff, which crossed Utah’s Wasatch Mountains and Great Salt Lake Desert.
The rugged terrain, and difficulties encountered while traveling along the Humboldt River in present-day Nevada, resulted in the loss of many cattle and wagons, and splits within the group.
By the beginning of November 1846 the emigrants had reached the Sierra Nevada, where they became trapped by an early, heavy snowfall near Truckee (now Donner) Lake, high in the mountains.
Their food supplies ran extremely low, and in mid-December some of the group set out on foot to obtain help.
Rescuers from California attempted to reach the emigrants, but the first relief party did not arrive until the middle of February 1847, almost four months after the wagon train became trapped.
Of the 87 members of the party, 48 survived to reach California.
Historians have described the episode as one of the most bizarre and spectacular tragedies in Californian history and in the record of western migration.”
Leave a comment
Posted in Leadville Life
Tagged Lake County Colorado , Leadville , Leadville Colorado , Leadville Public Safety Meeting , leadville today , Leadville traffic , Leadville weather , Leadville Weather Channel Donner Documentary , LeadvilleToday.com
Subscribe Today!
Enter your email address to receive notifications of Leadville's Latest News .
Search for:
Blog at WordPress.com.
The Coraline Theme .
Follow
Follow “Leadville Today”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 330 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com