APR
MAY
OCT
11
2015
2016
2017
43 captures
12 May 10 - 21 Oct 16
Close Help
Pages
About Us
Advisory Board
Board of Directors
Committees
Officers
Art Competition
2010 Gallery
2013 Winner’s Circle
2016 Art Competition Rules
Entry Form
California Pioneer Spirit in Art
Winners’ Gallery
California Pioneer History Days
Contact
Discovery of California Gold
Donate
For History Buffs
Bear Flag Creation
Distance of the Brooklyn Voyage
From Temecula Valley to Mission San Luis Rey
Mormon Battalion
01. Historical Prelude
02. Outfitting
03. The Enlistment
04. The Sick Detachments
05. Cooke’s Wagon Road
06. End of Service
07. Food Items used by the Mormon Battalion
08. Medicine
09. Period Clothing
10. U.S. Army Dragoons
11. Military Weapons
12. Pay, Accouterments and Gear
13. Military Draft Animals
14. Origin of the Bulls at Rancho San Bernardino
15. A Unit of Kearny’s Army of the West
16. Fort DuPont/Fort Stockton San Diego, Alta California
17. The “Lost Boys” of the Mormon Battalion – Arrival at San Diego
Mormon Battalion: A Unique Military Story
Mormon Battalion and Warner Ranch
Pre-Bear Flag Revolt History
San Pedro
The Mormon Volunteers
Heritage Brochures
California’s Pioneer Era 1846-1886
Saints, Soldiers, & Settlers
San Diego Historic Sites
San Francisco Walking Tour
Historic Events
Bear Flag Revolt
Donner Party
Mormon Battalion
Ship Brooklyn
So. Cal. Settlers
Historic Individuals
Historic Sites
Clarksville
Emigrant Trail
Historic Sites Map
Mormon Battalion Historic Site
San Diego
Old Town San Diego
Mormon Island
New Hope
San Diego
Ft. Stockton
Mormon Battalion Day
Mormon Battalion Day 2015
Mormon Battalion Visitor’s Center
Sutter's Fort
Just for Students
Just for Youth
Mormon Battalion Historic Sites Award
Mormon Battalion Trail Award Requirments
Sacramento Historic Trail Award
San Pasqual Battlefield & Kit Carson District Patch
Links
Membership
Individual
Institutional
Member Roster
Sponsor Wall
Mormon Gold
Pioneer Portrayals
Activities
Activity Instructions
First Person Presentations
Group Presentations
Mormon Pioneer Band
Preface
Duties Description
Sierra Nevada Mormon Pioneers
Videos
John Horner
Sam Brannan
Stephen Thomas Williams
William Brown Ide
Preserving the Pioneer Spirit
Privacy Policy
Project Sponsorships
Bancroft Library
Brochures
Fort Stockton Restoration Project
Re-Enactors
Teaching Packets
Trading Post
Cart
Checkout
Express
IPN
Receipt
Videos
Shopping Cart
0 items – $0.00 View Cart | Check out
Your cart is empty.
Donner Party
The story of the Donner Party is well known. What is not as well known is the “Mormon Connection” to this story. This section is to acquaint the reader with this interesting, but little known, information.
Much has been written about the ill-fated Donner Party. It is not the intent to go into a detailed restatement of the facts about that group. Very little is known about any “Mormon” connection to this group or event and this is the purpose for discussing it here. The nucleus of the party consisted of the families of George Donner and James Reed of Springield, Illinois. Their families and hired hands totaled about 33 people in nine covered wagons. They set out for California in mid-April 1846, arrived in Independence, Missouri, on May 10, 1846, and left two days later. On May 19, 1846, the Donners and Reeds joined a large wagon train captained by William H. Russell. Most of those who became members of the Donner Party were also in this group.
Part of this wagon train was a Mormon, Lavinia Jackson Murphy, 50, widow of Jeremiah Burns Murphy of North Carolina, who traveled with her seven children. Five were young: Landrum, 15, Mary, 13, Lemuel, 12, William, 11 and Simon, 10. The two eldest were married with children of their own: Sarah, 23, and her husband William Foster, 28, had a son George, 4. Harriet, 21, and her husband Willam Pike, 25, had two children, Naomi, 3, and Catherine, 1. The Murphys had two wagons. The town of Marysville, California (previously Johnson’s Ranch) was named after daughter, Mary, who survived the ordeal. It was Lavina’s granddaughter and Harriet Pike’s daughter, Naomi, that John Rhoads, of the rescue party, carried all the way out through snow drifts from Donner Lake to Johnson’s Ranch. Thomas Rhoads and his “Mormon” family, with 12 wagons and 38 members, was part of this larger wagon train. 
He had met with Brigham Young, a close friend, just prior to leaving and if is believed that he was on a scouting trip to find a possible site to locate the body of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that Young was planning on moving to the West.
For the next two months the travelers followed the California/Oregon Trail until they reached the Little Sandy River, in what is now Wyoming. It was here that the Donner/Reed Party decided to leave the rest of the train and take off on the Hasting’s Cutoff. The group now numbered 87 people in 23 wagons. The endured great hardships while blazing a trail and crossing the Wasatch Mountains into the Salt Lake Valley. This was the same trail used the following year by Brigham Young and his advanced party of church members to the Valley of the Great Salt Lake. The trail blazed by the Donner’s saved the saints a considerable amount of work and hardship.
The “shortcut” had taken the Donner Party many more weeks longer than the customary route. When they reached the Sierra Nevada Mountains at the end of October, a snowstorm kept them from getting over what is now known as Donner Pass.
The group was marooned in the snow until the first rescue party could reach them in mid-February, 1847. The leader of this 7 man rescue party was Thomas Rhoad’s oldest son, John, who was also accompanied by his brother, Daniel. Harriet Pike had made it out earlier to Johnson’s Ranch and John had promised her that he would rescue her two children back in the mountains. Both children were alive when the rescue party arrived at the Donner camp, but they rested a couple of days before returning and the baby, Caroline, died before they could leave. John made sure that Naomi lived, as he carried her on his shoulders the entire way through deep snow back to Johnson’s Ranch. John was in perfect physical condition at the time he went in for the rescue, but he was so weakened from the rescue that his health was never good after that and he died at the early age of 48.
The final “Mormon Connection” to this story is that General Stephen Kearny picked a detachment of 15 Mormon Battalion members to go with him and escort John C. Fremont back to the “states” for his court martial hearing. This group came upon the scattered remains of the Donner Party near the lake in the Spring of 1847. They laid over a couple of days, so this Mormon Battalion detachment could give proper burial to the Donner remains.
© Copyright 2009 California Pioneer Heritage Foundation | by Razzberry Media | Privacy Policy | Terms of Use | Admin