SEP
MAY
JUL
11
2015
2016
2017
4 captures
22 Sep 15 - 22 Jul 16
Close Help
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
Donner party
Article
Web sites
American pioneer group
Read
View History
Edit
Feedback
Donner party, group of American pioneers stranded en route to California. In late 1846, 87 immigrants led by George and Jacob Donner were trapped by heavy snow in the Sierra Nevada. Fifteen of the group set out to find help. When the others’ food ran out, they reportedly resorted to cannibalism of those already dead. (After examining remains from the campsite, researchers in 2010 announced that they had been unable to find any human bones or other physical evidence of cannibalism.) The 47 surviving members were rescued in February 1847. Donner Lake and Donner Pass , Calif., are named for them.
Share
Share:
Email
Print
Cite
Feedback
Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your Feedback . To propose your own edits, go to Edit Mode .
Keep exploring
World Organizations: Fact or Fiction?
The United States: Fact or Fiction?
Yemen Quiz
Editor Picks: Our Favorite Childhood Books
5 Creepy Things from The Thousand and One Nights
Email this page
Cancel
Send
Britannica Stories
In The News / Society
Dueling Lawsuits over Restroom Law
Demystified / Literature & Language
Why Do Languages Die?
Spotlight / Science
Transit of Mercury
See All Stories
BRITANNICA QUIZZES
Indianapolis 500
Lemurs: Fact or Fiction?
Insect Wings: Fact or Fiction?
See More Quizzes
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
©2016 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Citations
MLA style:
"Donner party". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016. Web. 11 May. 2016
<http://www.britannica.com/topic/Donner-party>.
APA style:
Donner party. (2016). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/topic/Donner-party
Harvard style:
Donner party. 2016. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Retrieved 11 May, 2016, from http://www.britannica.com/topic/Donner-party
Chicago Manual of Style:
Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "Donner party", accessed May 11, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/topic/Donner-party.
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Update
Link
Click anywhere inside the article to add text or insert superscripts, subscripts, and special characters.
You can also highlight a section and use the tools in this bar to modify existing content:
Add links to related Britannica articles!
You can double-click any word or highlight a word or phrase in the text below and then select an article from the search box.
Or, simply highlight a word or phrase in the article, then enter the article name or term you'd like to link to in the search box below, and select from the list of results.
Note: we do not allow links to external resources in editor.
Please click the Web sites link for this article to add citations for
external Web sites.
Editing Tools:
Tips for Editing
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles.
You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind:
Encyclopaedia Britannica articles are written in a neutral, objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
MEDIA FOR:
Donner party
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email. Try again later.
×