SEP
MAR
AUG
31
2014
2016
2017
8 captures
7 Jul 14 - 3 Aug 16
Close Help
skip to main | skip to sidebar
Links
Home
Timeline
Press Releases
News Articles
Inquest
Contacts
Monday, 5 August 2013
Tomlinson Family Response to Police Apology and Statement by DAC de Brunner
Julia Tomlinson on behalf of her family has responded to the announcement of DAC Maxine de Brunner saying:
“Today’s apology and admission by the Metropolitan Police that their officer unlawfully killed Ian marks the end of our campaign and legal case.
On 1st April 2009 when we first heard news of Ian’s death we simply wanted to know what had happened. We were completely in the dark until a week after his death when we saw the video capturing the violent assault on him by PC Harwood. It was, and still is a shocking video. We knew that Ian had been unlawfully killed by the officer as soon as we saw the video, but we had to first go through the long legal process of taking apart untruthful accounts given by PC Harwood and other police officers. We should not have had to do this.
The last four years have been a really hard uphill battle. We have had to deal with many obstacles and set backs. After the ‘unlawful killing’ verdict at the inquest it was unimaginable to us that PC Harwood could be acquitted of the criminal charge of manslaughter. We will never understand that verdict, but at least today’s public admission of unlawful killing by the Metropolitan Police is the final verdict, and it is as close as we are going to get to justice.
It has been hard to keep going sometimes. We’ve taken strength from the support that we’ve received from so many people who have walked with  us and  sent  us kind messages over the years. It has meant a lot to us. Thank you.
We would also like to thank Lucy Apps for the compassion she showed to Ian when she tried to save his life. Christopher le Jaunie and Paul Lewis for releasing the video that forced the investigation to face the truth; Estelle for organising our campaign, and Jules Carey and his legal team for never backing down in the legal battles.
It will always be painful for us that Ian died so violently, but at least he is at rest now, and the force has publicly acknowledged the truth. We hope that lessons have been learned and that other families will be spared the tragedy and ordeal that we have had to face.  We loved Ian and will always keep his memory alive by talking about him and sharing our memories with each other as we finally start looking to the future again”.
at 12:54  
Related Articles:
Older Post >> Home
About the Ian Tomlinson Family Campaign
This website and the Ian Tomlinson Family Campaign has been set up by Ian's family.  We are grateful for the huge amount of public support received since Ian’s tragic death on April 1st 2009 at the G20 protests in London. It has been very hard for our family particularly following the release of images of the police assault on Ian emerged.  Ian is deeply missed by us and we simply want justice for him.
We may have a long and difficult journey ahead to achieve justice and we will rely on your continued support.
Our family has set up this campaign for the following reasons:
• To demand a full investigation into Ian’s death that scrutinises the individual conduct and operational command tactics of police officers present at the G20 protest and those in command of them when Ian was assaulted and died
• To call for full criminal charges to be brought against any officer whose actions or failure of duty resulted in Ian’s death
• To campaign for change to any police policies, tactics or frequent abuses of power which may effectively endanger people’s lives rather than protect them, so that future deaths and injuries to the public can be prevented
• To raise awareness of any issues we may experience as a family seeking justice through statutory and judicial systems that are a cause for public concern
These are some things you may wish to do for now to support our campaign:
• Keep updated by checking this official family website for press releases, news articles and updates
• Join the official campaign mailing list by e-mail at iantomlinsonfamilycampaign@gmail.com and send any  messages of support or ideas to this address.
• Stay in contact – send us updates of any events you have organised including pictures, letters received back, press articles etc.
• Write to your MP
• Direct any witness information to our lawyers so it may be used in evidence
With thanks,
Family of Ian Tomlinson
Categories
Events (3)
Inquest (11)
News (15)
Press Statements (11)
Timeline (1)
Archive
August (1)
September (2)
August (3)
July (4)
June (2)
March (1)
November (1)
October (1)
September (1)
June (1)
May (4)
April (4)
March (5)
February (2)
January (1)
November (1)
September (1)
July (5)
March (2)
December (4)
November (5)
September (1)
August (2)
July (5)
June (3)
Ian Tomlinson Family Campaign © 2009 | Design: KB
BACK TO TOP   