AUG
MAR
Apr
31
2014
2016
2017
6 captures
19 Sep 12 - 31 Mar 16
Close Help
Accessibility links
Skip to article
Skip to navigation
Telegraph.co.uk
Search - enhanced by OpenText
Thursday 31 March 2016
Home
Video
News
World
Sport
Business
Money
Comment
Culture
Travel
Life
Women
Fashion
Luxury
Tech
Film
Politics
Investigations
Obits
Education
Science
Earth
Weather
Health
Royal
Celebrity
Defence
Scotland
Advertisement
Home »
News »
UK News »
Crime
PC Simon Harwood sacked over death of Ian Tomlinson
PC Simon Harwood, the police officer cleared of killing newspaper vendor Ian    Tomlinson during the G20 riots, has been sacked after being found guilty of    gross misconduct by a disciplinary panel.
Pc Simon Harwood (left) arrives at the inquest into the death of newspaper vendor Ian Tomlinson during the G20 protests Photo: REUTERS/PA
By Martin Evans , Crime Correspondent
10:46AM BST 17 Sep 2012
Follow
The 45-year-old had admitted striking Mr Tomlinson with his baton and pushing him to the ground during the riots near the Royal Exchange Buildings in the City of London on April 1 2009.
But he denied that his actions contributed to Mr Tomlinson's death and was cleared of manslaughter at a criminal trial in July.
Today a police panel found that he had breached professional standards through discreditable conduct and use of force, constituting gross misconduct.
He will now be sacked from the force and has accepted he will never be employed as a police officer again.
Related Articles
Police apologise over death of Ian Tomlinson
17 Sep 2012
Hillsborough families: we want police arrested
17 Sep 2012
Simon Harwood's mother-in-law blames 'drunk vendor'
21 Sep 2012
But Mr Tomlinson's family stormed out of the hearing dismissing it as a "whitewash" after the panel said it did not need to consider whether PC Tomlinson's actions had contributed to the newspaper vendor's death.
Patrick Gibbs QC, representing PC Harwood told the hearing that it was unnecessary to put the allegations again as they had been dealt with at the trial.
He said it was an attempt to "manufacture a show trial" by rehearing the evidence already considered.
But speaking outside of the hearing, Mr Tomlinson's step-son Paul King said: "I think it's pointless, it hasn't proved anything to us.
We still haven't got any answer from this.
After three-and-a-half years, I think its diabolical.
It's like we're back at day one.
We will carry on, it isn't going to be the last of it."
He said there was "no justice" in the fact that Harwood now faces the sack.
The family are planning to take civil action over Mr Tomlinson's death.
The hearing heard how PC Harwood has twice offered to resign following the incident, the first time after Mr Tomlinson's inquest and the second time after he was cleared of manslaughter at the criminal trial.
Both times his offers had been refused.
PC Harwood struck Mr Tomlinson as the newspaper vendor was making his way home from work.
The father of nine, who was an alcoholic and had slept rough for a number of years, managed to walk 75 yards before he collapsed and later died from internal bleeding.
Harwood, from Carshalton in Surrey, has already been acquitted of Mr Tomlinson's manslaughter, although an inquest found the father-of-nine was unlawfully killed.
Addressing the disciplinary panel, Patrick Gibbs QC, for Harwood said: ''Pc Harwood does indeed accept that the discredit which his actions, and the way in which they have been reported, has brought upon the Metropolitan Police Service amounts to gross misconduct.
He has twice offered his resignation to the Commissioner.''
He said that, with the benefit of hindsight, Harwood would have used ''no force at all'' if he had known about the state of Mr Tomlinson's health.
Mr Gibbs said: ''If he had known then what he now knows about the circumstances, everybody's movements and Mr Tomlinson's health, he would have used no force, let alone the force that he did use.''
Harwood has a controversial police disciplinary record, but this was not considered as part of the hearing because the accusations are more than two years old.
A number of allegations were made against Harwood over a 12-year period and he was allowed to retire from the Met on medical grounds in 2001 despite unresolved disciplinary proceedings.
He was accused of unlawful arrest, abuse of authority and discreditable conduct over an incident when he allegedly shouted at another driver and knocked him over his car door, before announcing that he was a police officer and arresting the motorist on a common assault charge.
But the proceedings were discontinued when he retired.
Later, Harwood rejoined the force as a civilian worker before becoming a police officer for Surrey.
He was then allowed to rejoin the Met in 2004 as part of its territorial support group (TSG), specialising in public order.
After he was acquitted of manslaughter, police watchdog the Independent Police Complaints Commission said his case raised "grave concerns" about Met vetting procedures.
The force admitted that proper checks had not been made, but said processes had since changed.
Crime
News »
UK News »
Martin Evans »
In Crime
Mexican mugshots
Hatton Garden heist
Brits on the run
Bizarre smuggling attempts
World's worst serial killers
30 criminal cases involving 'Fake Sheikh' to be reviewed after Tulisa drugs trial
Motorway tailgating blackspots: where are the worst?
Top news galleries
The 25 best comedy duos
Comedy
Martin and Lewis, The Two Ronnies, Amy Poehler and Tina Fey.
Laurel and Hardy.
Here's our pick of the greatest comedy duos
Culture stars who died in 2016
Culture News
We celebrate and remember the culture stars who have passed away in 2016
The world's most convenient airports
Forget costly transfers: these airports are each fewer than eight miles - and    some just a 20-minute walk - from the city centre
US Presidents: 30 great one-liners
Books
Great quotes from White House incumbents: will Donald Trump be joining them?
Google Street View: Funny images
We've pulled together the most amusing Street View images from around the    world
80 great quotes about love and romance
Books
In Pictures - the story of love and romance: from Adam and Eve to    Tinder and Chemsex.
Compiled by Martin Chilton
The world's most misleading airports
Which airports are the most ridiculous distance from the cities they are    supposed to serve?
Macro monsters in pictures
Photographer captures the faces, legs and bodies (and prey) of some of Asia's    jumping spider species.
Pictures of the day
Today: A baby rhino with mum, an overloaded tuktuk and a sunset in    Thailand
Chernobyl's ghost towns
In pics: Inside the city of Pripyat, abandonded in 1986
Comments
Advertisement
Telegraph on Facebook
Advertisement
Latest Video»
Large rat climbs on sleeping commuter
Teen pepper-sprayed at Trump rally
Disabled great-grandfather denied stairlift and forced to crawl
Elderly wombat rescued after being attacked
EgyptAir crew finally arrive in Cairo
Sponsored
When media meets medicine
Sign up to our Frontpage news email
More from the web
Advertisement
Advertisement
More from the web
More from the web
Barnebys
The women behind the supercar industry
View
Diesel Performance
The innovative Shell V-Power Nitro+ Diesel
View
BMW
Watch Jodie Kidd test drive BMW’s greenest sports car
View
Culture
Diamonds are a man’s best friend
View
Back to top
HOME
News
UK News
Politics
Long Reads
Wikileaks
Jobs
World News
Europe
USA
China
Royal Family News
Celebrity news
Dating
Finance
Education
Defence
Weird News
Editor's Choice
Financial Services
Pictures
Video
Matt
Alex
Comment
Blogs
Crossword
Contact us
Privacy and Cookies
Advertising
Fantasy Football
Tickets
Announcements
Reader Prints
Follow Us
Apps
Epaper
Expat
Promotions
Subscriber
Syndication
© Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2016
Terms and Conditions
Today's News
Archive
Style Book
Weather Forecast