Quiz 208: Indian Polity & Constitution
September 12, 2009 5 Comments
1.protection of wild life comes under which of the following in India?
(A)Fundamental Right
(B)Fundamental Duty
(C)Directive principles of State Policy
2.Which among the following was an objective to add fundamental duties in Indian Constitution? Select two right answers.
(A)Make Fundamental Rights More meaningful
(B)Check Antinational, subversive and unconstitutional agitations
(C)To accord a priority to directive principles over fundamental rights
3.Which among the following does not come under Fundamental Duties of a citizen in  India?
(A)To protect and Improve Natural Environment
(B)To develop scientific temper, humanism and spirit of inquiry and reform
(C)To strive towards abolition of untouchability
4.Who among the following said this? ” Directive principles of State Policy are like a cheque on a Bank payable at the convenience of the bank”?
(A)Pt. Jawahar Lal Nehru
5.Choose which among the following is not a directive principle of state Policy ?
(A)The state shall seek to ensure equal pay for equal work by men & women
(B)The state shall seek to ensure equal eight to an adequate means of livelihood
(C)The state shall seek to ensure abolition of untouchability
6.Which among the following is correct regarding Directive Principles?
(A)Positive Injunctions
(B)Negative Injunctions
(C)Justifiable Injunctions
7. Supreme court ruled that ” the fundamental rights and Directive Principles ” are in fact supplementary to each other and together constitute an integrated scheme”. This is known as which of the following ?
(A)Doctrine of Pith & Substance
(B)Doctrine of Colorable Legislation
(C)Doctrine of Harmonization
8.Which of the following committee made a recommendation that election commission should be a three member body ?
(A)Takunde Committee
(B)Ashok Mehta Committee
(C)Jeevan Reddy Committee
9.Apart from giving constitutional recognition to the Municipalities which amendment lays down that in every state two district Planning Committees shall be constituted ?
(A)71st Amendment