Fundamental Rights and Duties of Indian

1. Assignment by R.Aishwarya
2. Indian constitution
3. Introduction The Indian constitution is the supreme law of India It lays down the framework defining fundamental political principles, establishes the structure, procedures, powers, and duties of government institutions, and sets out fundamental rights, directive principles and the duties of citizens.
4. It is the longest written constitution of any sovereign country in the world, containing 448 articles in 25parts, 12 schedules, 5 appendices and 98 amendments . Dr. Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar is widely regarded as the father of the Indian Constitution.
5. The Constitution of India is Fedral in nature. Each State and each Union territory of India have their own government.
6. Fundamental rights defined as the basic human rights of all citizens and it is defined in part 3 of the constitution, apply irrespective of race, place of birth, religion, caste, creed or gender. According to the constitution , every citizen has certain rights, known as a fundamental rights of a citizen , and the constitution guarantees every citizen of those.
7. THERE ARE SIX TYPES OF FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS THEY ARE
8. 1.Right to Equality : • All people are equal before the law.
9. 2.Right to Freedom: A citizen is given the right of freedom of speech and expression; to assemble peacefully anywhere without arms; to form associations and unions; to move in any part of the country; to reside in any part of the country; take up any occupation trade and business in any part of Indian territory and the right to education
10. 3.Right against Exploitation: Children below 14 years of age should not be allowed to work in factories and mines and people should live a life with dignity.
11. 4.Right to Freedom of Religion: India being a secular state, all religions are treated equally.
12. 5.Cultural and Educational Rights: There is a lot of diversity in India so people have a right to preserve and promote their own language and culture
13. 6.Right to Constitutional Remedies : A citizen can move the court if his fundamental right is deprived in any way
14. Right to property: It is originally a fundamental right , but is now a legal right
15. Fundamental Duties To abide by the Constitution and respect the National Flag and the National Anthem; To cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom; To uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
16. To defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so; To promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities and to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women;
17. To value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture; To protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life and to have compassion for living creatures; To develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
18. To safeguard public property and to abjure violence; To strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity, so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of Endeavour and achievement." To provide opportunities for education by the parent the guardian, to his child, or a ward between the age of 6-14 years as the case may be.
19. An analysis of the above duties reveals that they are applicable only to citizens and not to the aliens. It is expected that a citizen of India. While enjoying fundamental rights, should also perform these duties.