Quiz 208: Indian Polity & Constitution September 12, 20095 Comments 1.protection of wild life comes under which of the following in India? (A)Fundamental Right (B)Fundamental Duty (C)Directive principles of State Policy 2.Which among the following was an objective to add fundamental duties in Indian Constitution? Select two right answers. (A)Make Fundamental Rights More meaningful (B)Check Antinational, subversive and unconstitutional agitations (C)To accord a priority to directive principles over fundamental rights 3.Which among the following does not come under Fundamental Duties of a citizen in India? (A)To protect and Improve Natural Environment (B)To develop scientific temper, humanism and spirit of inquiry and reform (C)To strive towards abolition of untouchability 4.Who among the following said this? ” Directive principles of State Policy are like a cheque on a Bank payable at the convenience of the bank”? (A)Pt. Jawahar Lal Nehru (B)Prof. K T Shah (C)Dr. B R Ambedkar 5.Choose which among the following is not a directive principle of state Policy ? (A)The state shall seek to ensure equal pay for equal work by men & women (B)The state shall seek to ensure equal eight to an adequate means of livelihood (C)The state shall seek to ensure abolition of untouchability 6.Which among the following is correct regarding Directive Principles? (A)Positive Injunctions (B)Negative Injunctions (C)Justifiable Injunctions 7. Supreme court ruled that ” the fundamental rights and Directive Principles ” are in fact supplementary to each other and together constitute an integrated scheme”. This is known as which of the following ? (A)Doctrine of Pith & Substance (B)Doctrine of Colorable Legislation (C)Doctrine of Harmonization 8.Which of the following committee made a recommendation that election commission should be a three member body ? (A)Takunde Committee (B)Ashok Mehta Committee (C)Jeevan Reddy Committee 9.Apart from giving constitutional recognition to the Municipalities which amendment lays down that in every state two district Planning Committees shall be constituted ? (A)71st Amendment (B) 74th Amendment (C)76th Amendment 10.Which among the following sentence is correct ? (A)Part IX related to Panchayats & Part IX A relates to Municipalities (B)Part IX A related to Panchayats & Part IX A relates to Municipalities (C)none of them is correct 11.The 12th Finance Commission has recommended grants worth Rs. 25000 crores payable during the period 2005-2010 to states for rural and urban bodies. The allocation is based upon various factors and weights assigned by 12th Finance Commission. (A)30% (B)40% (C)50% 12.The fundamental duties were incorporated in the Indian Constitution in which year ? (A)1975 (B)1976 (C)1979 13.The uniform civil code which has been recommended in the directive principles is to ensure which of the following? (A)National Integration (B)Economic Equality (C)Fundamental Rights 14.In the constitution of which of the following the directive principles of state policy are not provided? (A)India (B)Ireland (C)USA 15.Which among the following is NOT a fundamental duty of a citizen? (A)Respect for the constitution (B)Respect for the National Flag & National Anthem (C)Respect for the Government 16.Which part of the Indian Constitution enshrines Fundamental Duties? (A)Part IV (B)Part IV A (C)Part III A 17.Who among the following is required to cause to be laid before both houses of parliament in respect of each year financial year a statement of estimated receipts & expenditures of the government? (A)Finance Minister (B)Prime Minister (C) President 18.What is the total strength of Rajya Sabha ? (A)240 (B)243 (C)245 19.A short notice question can be asked with a notice shorter than ___? (A)10 clear days (B)7 clear days (C)5 clear days 20.In which type of the question a written answer is desired? (A)Starred Question (B)Unstarred Question (C)None of them Category: GKToday's GK Quiz Archive Advertisement Comments pinky September 16, 2009 Log in to Reply very useful site COMMITED To TARGET November 25, 2009 Log in to Reply Sir, I didn't understand the following questions, please reply me with explanation and are 17.Who among the following is required to cause to be laid before both houses of parliament in respect of each year financial year a statement of estimated receipts & expenditures of the government? (A)Finance Minister (B)Prime Minister (C)President 19.A short notice question can be asked with a notice shorter than ___? (A)10 clear days (B)7 clear days (C)5 clear days 20.In which type of the question a written answer is desired? (A)Starred Question (B)Unstarred Question (C)None of them In 17Q, what i understood is receipts and expenditures will be produced in Both hopuses if only president asks ? am i right……….? In 19 and 20Q, you are speaking the Question , is it related to the one to be asked in House ……? Please reply me Thanking you sir Manjunath.M manjunath031@gmail.com jatin goyal May 15, 2011 Log in to Reply Q.1 doesnt protection of wildlife come BOTH under Fundamental duties and Directive Principles (Art 48A)? Sajad Tantray February 27, 2014 Log in to Reply Yes it comes Mamun April 30, 2014 Log in to Reply I do want practice set for forthcoming wbcs exam 2014 in PDF free dawnloading.. Please