Mar
APR
May
11
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
11 Apr 16 - 11 Apr 16
Close Help
Erstellen Erkunden Lernen & Support
Loslegen
Anmelden
Preise
Loslegen
Anmelden
Meine Prezis Erkunden Lernen & Support
Produkt Unternehmen Karriere Support Community Kontakt Apps
English Español 한국어 日本語 Deutsch Português Français Magyar Italiano
×
Houston, wir haben ein Problem!
Hoppla. Eine Firewall blockiert den Zugriff auf Prezi-Inhalte. Lesen Sie diesen Artikel , um mehr darüber zu erfahren, oder kontaktieren Sie Ihren System-Administrator.
Lädt Präsentation...
Öffentlich & kopierbar
Kopieren Teilen Einbetten Liked Like
Fernpräsentation
Senden Sie den Link unten via E-Mail oder PN
Kopieren
Präsentieren Sie für Ihr Publikum
Fernpräsentation beginnen
Eingeladene Zuschauer werden Ihnen folgen, während Sie navigieren und präsentieren
Zu dieser Präsentation eingeladene Personen benötigen kein Prezi-Konto
Dieser Link verfällt 10 Minuten, nachdem Sie die Präsentation schließen
Maximal 30 Nutzer können Ihrer Präsentation folgen
Erfahren Sie in unserer Wissensdatenbank mehr über diese Funktion
Möchten Sie diese Prezi wirklich löschen?
Weder Sie, noch die Personen, mit denen Sie diese Prezi geteilt haben, können die Prezi dann wiederherstellen.
Löschen Abbrechen
Möchten Sie Ihre "Likes" auf Facebook sichtbar machen?
Verbinden Sie Ihr Facebook-Konto mit Prezi und lassen Sie Ihre "Likes" in Ihrer Chronik erscheinen.
Sie können dies jederzeit unter Einstellungen & Konto ändern.
Nein danke
Mit Facebook verbinden
Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles and Fundamental Duties
By Garv Nair 8-O
von
am 29. Juni 2014
Twittern
Kommentare (0)
Bitte anmelden , um Ihren Kommentar hinzuzufügen.
Missbrauch melden
Transkript von Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles and Fundamental Duties
The Fundamental Rights, embodied in Part III of the Constitution, guarantee civil rights to all Indians, and prevent the State from encroaching on individual liberty while simultaneously placing upon it an obligation to protect the citizens' rights from encroachment by society. Seven fundamental rights were originally provided by the Constitution – right to equality, right to freedom, right against exploitation, right to freedom of religion, cultural and educational rights, right to property and right to constitutional remedies. However, the right to property was removed from Part III of the Constitution by the 44th Amendment in 1978.
There are different rights
Origins
Don’t be mean, Don’t be hated, Human rights shouldn’t be violated
Fundamental Rights
Fundamental Duties
Rights
The Fundamental Duties of citizens were added to the Constitution by the 42nd Amendment in 1976, upon the recommendations of the Swaran Singh Committee that was constituted by the government earlier that year. Originally ten in number, the Fundamental Duties were increased to eleven by the 86th Amendment in 2002, which added a duty on every parent or guardian to ensure that their child or ward was provided opportunities for education between the ages of six and fourteen years. The other Fundamental Duties obligate all citizens to respect the national symbols of India, including the Constitution, to cherish its heritage, preserve its composite culture and assist in its defence.
They also obligate all Indians to promote the spirit of common brotherhood,protect the environment and public property,develop scientific temper, abjure violence, and strive towards excellence in all spheres of life. Citizens are morally obligated by the Constitution to perform these duties. However,like the Directive Principles, these are non-justifiable, without any legal sanction in case of their violation or non-compliance. There is reference to such duties in international instruments such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and Article 51A brings the Indian Constitution into conformity with these treaties
Right to Equality
Right to Freedom
Right against Exploitation
Right to Freedom of Religion
Cultural and Educational Rights
Right to Constitutional Remedies
Each right gives power to the citizens of
India to go against injustice
$1.25
Monday, February 17, 1948
Vol XCIII, No. 311
Origins
Analysis on the topic
Criticsm
The Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles had their origins in the Indian independence movement, which strove to achieve the values of liberty and social welfare as the goals of an independent Indian state. The development of constitutional rights in India was inspired by historical documents such as England's Bill of Rights, the United States Bill of Rights and France's Declaration of the Rights of Man. The demand for civil liberties formed an important part of the Indian independence movement, with one of the objectives of the Indian National Congress (INC) being to end discrimination between the British rulers and their Indian subjects. This demand was explicitly mentioned in resolutions adopted by the INC between 1917 and 1919. The demands articulated in these resolutions included granting to Indians the rights to equality before law, free speech, trial by juries composed at least half of Indian members, political power, and equal terms for bearing arms as British citizens.
Fewer children are now employed in hazardous environments, but their employment in non-hazardous jobs, prevalently as domestic help, violates the spirit of the constitution in the eyes of many critics and human rights advocates. More than 16.5 million children are in employment. India was ranked 88 out of 159 countries in 2005, according to the degree to which corruption is perceived to exist among public officials and politicians. The year 1990–1991 was declared as the "Year of Social Justice" in the memory of B.R. Ambedkar. The government provides free textbooks to students belonging to scheduled castes and tribes pursuing medicine and engineering courses. During 2002–2003, a sum of Rs. 4.77 crore (47.7 million) was released for this purpose. In order to protect scheduled castes and tribes from discrimination, the government enacted the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, prescribing severe punishments for such actions.
Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles and Fundamental Duties of India
History
Komplettes Transkript
Weitere Präsentationen von
Untitled Prezi
Conventional Energy
Untitled Prezi
Weitere Prezis von diesem Autor
Beliebte Präsentationen
Weitere beliebte oder die neuesten Prezis ansehen
Produkt Unternehmen Karriere Support Community Kontakt Apps
English
español
한국어
日本語
Deutsch
Português
français
Magyar
italiano
© 2016 Prezi Inc.  Nutzungsbedingungen
<p>Verbinden Sie Ihr Facebook-Konto mit Prezi und veröffentlichen Sie in der Zukunft Ihre "Likes".</p><form class="bypass" method="post" action="/web/20160411124126/https://prezi.com/associate/facebook/"><input type='hidden' name='csrfmiddlewaretoken' value='JIkyWWFowSb7WuldkcqEGajBHhpybaCa' /><input type="hidden" name="next" value="/zq31mbmtzufh/og-like/"><p class="clearfix"><button type="submit" class="btn btn-primary" id="fb-connect-like-ok-btn">OK</button><a class="btn pull-right" onclick="closeOverlay();return false;" href="javascript:void(0);">Nein danke</a></p></form>