APR
APR
AUG
11
2015
2016
2017
21 captures
11 Feb 10 - 5 Aug 16
Close Help
HOME
NEWS 2009 :: JANUARY 2010
JAN
FEB
MAR
FEBRUARY 2010
Shobhaa De Delivers  Talk at KISS
27.02.2010
Total Hip Replacement Surgery at KIMS
27.02.2010
National Seminar on Intellectual Property Law Held at KIIT
26.02.2010
Incredible  Placement in All Streams of KIIT     KIIT Techno Management Fest - Kritansh’ 10 Concludes
17.02.2010
Mega Techno-Management Fest ‘KRITANSH '10’ Inaugurated at KIIT
14.02.2010
Contributions of KISS in Tribal Empowerment Surprise Central Govt
13.02.2010
KISS Model to be Replicated in all States: Hon'ble Union  Minister Shri Kantilal Bhuria
10.02.2010
VIEW PHOTOS
Second H. M. Seervai Memorial Lecture at KIIT Law School
08.02.2010
KIIT signs MOU with Pokhara University, Nepal
03.02.2010
VIEW PHOTOS
KIIT Law School Organises Training Course for Cops
01.02.2010
Shobhaa De Delivers Talk at KISS
Ms Shobhaa De,  eminent writer and columnist, delivered a talk at Kalinga Institute of Social  Sciences (KISS) on 27th February 2010.
The talk constitutes a part of sixty-day  Lecture Series under International Seminar on 'We and Our Tribes', organised by  KISS and inaugurated by Shri Kantilal Bhuria, Hon'ble Union Minister of Tribal  Affairs on 10th February 2010.
Touching upon the  subject, Ms De said that the tribal culture still in archaic mode in India.
While everyone is moving forward in today's rapidly modernising world, this has  failed to cast its influence on the tribal culture, she observed.
However, it  is important to respect and preserve their culture, she stressed.
Ms. De was  accompanied by her husband Mr. Dilip De on her visit to KISS, the largest  residential institute for tribals in Asia.
This is her second time visit to  this institute.
Showering lavish  praises on Dr. A. Samanta, Founder, KIIT & KISS, she said that that only  ten more visionaries like Dr. Samanta are enough to ensure rapid development of  the country.
KISS should transfer his vision all over the world, she stated,  while appreciating the achievements of KISS students in rugby, hockey, etc.
The  optimism seen on the faces of KISS students reflects Dr. Samanta’s dedication and  tireless efforts, she said, adding that it is a matter of privilege to be here.
Expressing gratitude  to literary genius Ms. Shobhaa De and Mr. Dilip De for visiting KISS, Dr.  Samanta said that it is a golden moment to be in inspiring company of personalities  like them.
Total Hip Replacement Sur gery at KIMS
A team of doctors from Kalinga Institute of Medical Sciences (KIMS) of KIIT University have performed a rare total hip replacement surgery.
Left hip joint of Bansidhar Jena (61), a resident of Kalyanpur village of Khurda District and employed as Section Officer in Bhubaneswar Regional Research Centre, was damaged after he met with a road accident.
The patient was operated and a plate was placed at the affected part at S.C.B Medical College and Hospital, Cuttack in 1995.
Doctors advised him to change this plate after three years.
However, due to some problems the patient did not follow the advice.
So his condition continued to deteriorate resulting in pain and suffering.
He was disappointed even after treatment by several doctors of Hyderabad, including in Apollo.
Upon suggestions of his relatives, he was admitted at KIMS under the guidance of Dr. Basanta Kumar Behera.
On 15th February, Dr. Behera and his team of doctors successfully performed a rare surgery and fixed a machine.
Now his health condition is good and he can move.
Mr. Bansidhar Jena and his family members thanked Dr. Behera and his surgical team.
National Seminar on Intellectual Pr operty Law Held at KIIT
KIIT Law School in collaboration with NIPO, New Delhi organized a National Seminar on 'Recent Developments in Intellectual Property Law' on 26th February 2010.
The seminar was inaugurated by Mr. M. K. Chakrabarti, Founding Partner, MKC & Associates, Intellectual Property Law Offices in the presence of Mr. T. C. James, Director, NIPO and Former Director, Ministry of Commerce & Industry, Govt.
of India, New Delhi, Mr. Dominic Keating, First Secretary for Intellectual Property, United States Embassy in India, New Delhi, Dr. A. Samanta, Founder, KIIT & KISS, Mr. H. P. Das, Pro- Chancellor, Prof. S. C. De Sarkar, Vice Chancellor and Dr. N. K. Chakraberty, Director, KLS.
Focusing on the theme, Mr. Chakrabarti said that the seminar will provide knowledge about the latest developments in the law of patents, copyrights, trademarks as well as fair use of trademarks online and copyright misuse.
Countries have enacted laws to protect intellectual property in order to promote creativity and dissemination and application of its results, adding that this is very important in our daily life.
Speaking on the occasion, Mr. James said that intellectual property is an integral part of economic development and interactions in modern society.
It has high relevance in  industrial, scientific, literary and artistic activities.
Intellectual Property Right plays a vital role in enhancing the socio-economic property of the country.
With its increasing relevance, it is important to recognize the role which IP system plays in the growth of the nation.
Thus, there is need to create large public awareness about pivotal role of IPR in globalized knowledge economy, said Mr. Dominic Keating.
Dr. Samanta extended gratitude to all the legal luminaries for participating at the seminar.
Among others Dr. V. K. Gupta, Former Scientist G, National Institute of Science Technology and Development Studies, Govt.
of India, New Delhi, Rosan Aggarwal, Director, Siddhast JP Innovation Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, Ms. Sanjit Kual Batra, Commercial Specialist for intellectual Property United States Embassy in India, New Delhi, Mr. Akhilesh Kumar Gupta, Director, aONEgy, Venture & President, Patent Agent Association of India, Dr. P. N. Razdan, Pro Vice Chancellor, Prof. A. K. Jha, Registrar, KIIT and other distinguished personalities from the different fields present on the occasion.
Incredible  Placement in All Streams of KIIT
KIIT  University has an incredible placement record from its inception.
Almost all  the students get placed even before they complete their course in this  University.
It is so because of its quality academics, industry exposure and  rigorous placement training by the experts from various industries.
The  University has achieved excellent placement in all streams for its graduates  passing out in 2010.
This is a repeat of performance from last many years  showing that KIIT students enjoy special preference of recruiters.
Nearly  1250 students will graduate from  B. Tech., MCA, MBA, MBA in Rural Management and Biotechnology courses of KIIT  University in 2010 May/June.
It is  incredible that KIIT is set to place almost all its graduates comfortably and  gainfully through campus placement at a time when global recession has dampened  the job prospect across most campuses in India and globe.
The technology streams have recorded  60% placement, with 253 students bagging offer letters from TCS alone.
Technology streams traditionally enjoy the best placement among all  streams of KIIT University.
This time more than 20 companies, including TCS,  Infosys,  HCL Technologies, Vedanta,  Grasim Cement, Adani Power, Tata Power, IOTL, Essar Group and ACC visited the  campus.
The highest pay of Rs.
6.5 lac  p.a. was offered by Tata Steel, while the average salary was Rs.
4.2 lac p.a.
As many as 18 companies have so far visited the KIIT School of Management for  placement.
These include HDFC Bank, SBI Life, OCL, Airtel, Aegon Religare,  Fenesta, Mother Dairy, Grasim Cement, Helix Technology, Mahindra Finance, Asian  Paints, BP Ergo and SREI Finance.
School of Biotechnology and School of Rural Management, two new schools founded  in 2007, surprised the academicians with the overwhelming response of companies  for its 2nd Batch of students.
Despite  the fact that campus placement of Biotechnology graduates in the country does  not take place in a big way, the School of Biotechnology of KIIT University  attracted reputed names such as Excel Life Sciences, KPS Clinical  Services, JN Mitra and APTI Craft, to name a few.
Similarly,  companies visiting KIIT School of Rural  Management include GCMM (Amul), International Rice Research Institute  (Manila), Indian Oil Company (JV), Jaipur Rug Company, MIMI Finance and  Spandana.
KIIT’s unique focus on overall development of its  students and brand building helped its students to beat recession, said Dr. A.  Samanta, Founder of KIIT Group of Institutions.
Even as the economy is emerging out of the recession, academicians have  expressed hope that students of KIIT will not have problem in getting placed  due to the excellent inputs and brand name of the institute.
By end of March  more than 40 companies have confirmed their visit to the University for  placement.
Rest of the students are expected to be placed within these two  months.
KIIT Techno Management Fest - Kritansh’ 10 Concludes
The valedictory ceremony of the three-day Annual Techno Management Fest of KIIT University, Kritansh’ 10, in presence of Shri Prafulla Chandra Ghadai, Hon’ble Minister of Finance and Excise, Govt.
of Orissa, Dr. P. K. Patasani, Hon'ble MP, Bhubaneswar, Shri Bhagirathi Badajena, Hon’ble M.L.A, Bhubaneswar North (Uttar), Pinky Anand Sr.
Advocate, Supreme Court of India and Pooja Bedi, Social Activist and Notes Bollywood Actress and Dr. A. Samanta, Founder, KIIT & KISS.
Competitions like Robotics (Robospere), paper presentation (Anvenshan), stock market ((Bulls n Bears), and LAN Gaming (Kuru khetra) featured as the first day events.
About 1500 students from leading technical and professional institutions from across the country such as NITs, IITs, XIMB, and others are participating in the three-day mega techno management fest.
During the Techno Management Fest, Shri Sunny Vaghela, Director, Tech-Defence Ethical Hacker had given a very informative speech to the students in the Special Lecture Session.
Prizes worth Rs.10 lakhs were given away to the winners.
The fest was inaugurated by His Excellency Shri M. C. Bhandare, Hon’ble Governor of Odisha in the august presence of Guests of Honour Shri D. P. Mishra, Hon’ble Minister for Higher Education, Culture & Tourism, Odisha and Dr. Mahavir Pun, eminent social worker and Ramon Magsaysay awardee.
Among others Prof. S. C. De Sarkar, Vice Chancellor, Dr. A. K. Jha, Pro-VC and students of the School of Technology and staff were present on the occasion.
Mega Techno-Management Fest ‘KRITANSH '10’ Inaugurated at KIIT
The 4th Annual Techno Management Fest of KIIT   University, Kritansh '10, was inaugurated here on 14th February 2010.
The fest,   which was inaugurated by His Excellency Shri M. C. Bhandare, Hon’ble Governor of   Odisha in the august presence of Guests of Honour Shri D. P. Mishra, Hon’ble   Minister for Higher Education, Culture & Tourism, Odisha and Dr. Mahavir   Pun, eminent social worker and Ramon Magsaysay awardee.
Speaking on the occasion, Shri Bhandare observed that   Kritansh is designed to provide the participants with an array of exciting   events, covering science, technology and management dimensions, where they can   display their creativity in a competitive environment.
At a time when creativity   and innovation are of utmost importance, such events for the budding   professionals encourage the spirit of inventiveness and innovation and promise   long term benefits, he said.
Techno management fest is now-a-days very popular   among the institutions and the student community find it exciting and fun   filling, Shri Bhandare stated, adding that while theoretical knowledge is   important, innovation and creativity are required in many life situations.
The   country looks at its youth, which constitutes 60% of the population, to become   wealth creators equipping themselves with knowledge, rights skills and spirit of   innovation, he said.
Outlining the contribution of KIIT in the higher   education scenario of Orissa, Shri Devi Mishra said that it has filled up the   gap of a quality institution of national character in the State.
Due to the   continuous effort of KIIT, the students not only from the state, but also across   the country are getting benefitted, he stated.
Dr. Mahavir Pun explained his experiences to become an   innovator.
In his early childhood he was so poor that he could not get proper   education, Dr. Pun said, adding that he always aimed to be an engineer.
Despite   all odds he got success which enabled him to transform his little village into a   technological hub.
Dr. A. Samanta, Founder of KIIT outlined the   achievements of the students of the university in academics, technical, sports   and cultural activities.
Fests like Kritansh would go a long way in create a   broad platform for knowledge sharing among future engineers and managers, he   said.
Prof. S. C. De Sarkar, Vice Chancellor, KIIT University   gave the information about Kritansh.
Dr. Mrutyunjay Suar, Director, KSBT   proposed the vote of thanks.
Competitions like Robotics (Robospere), paper   presentation (Anvenshan), stock market ((Bulls n Bears), and LAN Gaming (Kuru   khetra) feature as the first day events.
About 1500 students from leading   technical and professional institutions from across the country are   participating in the three-day mega techno management fest.
Contributions of KISS in Tribal Empowerment Surprise Central Govt
Contributions and services of Kalinga Institute of Social Sciences (KISS) in the field of tribal empowerment without any Government aid has surprised the Central Government.
This sentiment was expressed by Shri Kantilal Bhuria, Hon’ble Minister for Tribal Affairs, Govt.
of India, who returned back to Delhi after one-day visit to KISS on 10th February 2010.
Taking a note of the worldwide reputation of this unique institution for tribals, Shri Bhuria lauded its activities terming it as an example to be emulated by all.
Facilities and care provided to 10,000 tribal children are no way less than any public school, he observed, while expressing surprise that KISS has come to this level without any Government aid.
On the contrary, various projects similar to KISS have not had much success despite huge Government expenditure on them, he noted.
Stating that experiences of KISS are a source of learning for the Ministry, the Hon'ble Minister requested Dr. A. Samanta, Founder of KISS & KIIT to help establish institutions on the patterns of KISS in every state of the country.
Shri Bhuria assured all assistance to him in this direction.
The Minister was surprised to learn from Dr. Samanta about generous financial provision for KISS and its excellent management, despite a loan burden of 250 crore on KIIT.
Students are insulated from any adverse impact from this.
He assured all possible help to the institution from the Ministry of Tribal Affairs for its further development.
Prior to visiting KISS, Shri Bhuria had gathered detailed information on the institution.
"It is a noble initiative by Dr. Samanta, a man who has spent his childhood in poverty", the minister remarked, terming it one of its kind in the world.
KISS was established in 1993 in a rented house with 125 tribal students.
At present it has 10000 students.
KISS Model to be Replicated in all States: Hon'ble Union  Minister Shri Kantilal Bhuria
An International  Seminar on 'We and our Tribes' was inaugurated by Shri Kantilal Bhuria, Hon’ble  Minister for Tribal Affairs, Govt.
of India at Kalinga Institute of Social  Sciences (KISS) on 10th February 2010.
KISS is a model institute, which  provides free health and food to 10,000 tribal students, besides education from  Kindergarten to Postgraduate level, the Hon’ble Union Minister observed, while  stating that educational institutes on the patterns of KISS would be set up for  tribals in different parts of the country.
He reminded Mahatma  Gandhi's assertion that India can get independence in true sense of terms only  when tribals will join the mainstream through education and said that KISS has realized  this dream of Mahatma Gandhi.
Informing that residential tribal institute on  the patterns of KISS will be established on 40 acre land in every state, he  welcomed the management of KISS to take initiative in this direction.
All  possible support will be extended by the Ministry for this, Shri Bhuria assured.
He complemented KISS  as the largest 'Santiniketan' in Asia.
Vocation training imparted by KISS is of  a high standard, Shri Bhuria said, while assuring all assistance through TRIFED  to further develop it.
He stressed on creation of market for the products made  in vocational training centers.
At KISS Campus, He unveiled a golden plaque in  his honour and inaugurated a stall for vocational training products managed by  the students of KISS.
Lack of access to  education is a major problem for tribals, he said and informed that the  Ministry has initiated many measures to overcome this problem.
Eklavya  institutions have been started in all the States during the current financial  year and adequate financial assistance made available to them, he stated.
The Hon’ble Union  Minister visited different units of KISS and planted a sapling.
His other programmes  in KISS included inauguration of UNFPA-KISS Life Skill Office and a Dongaria  Kondh Demo House.
Apprising various  steps taken for upliftment of tribals, Dr. A. B. Ota, Director, State Tribal  Research and Training Institute said that training has been provided to poor  tribal to make them self dependent.
They have also been provided housing under  Indira Awas Scheme, he added.
Informing about the Tribal Seminar, Dr. Satyendra  Patnaik of KISS said that a large number of eminent academicians and personalities  will deliver lecture on various aspects of tribal development during the course  of next two months.
Delivering  the welcome address, Dr. A. Samanta said that visit of the Hon’ble Union Minister  and tribal leader Shri Kantilal Bhuria has fulfilled long standing wishes of  the students of KISS.
Smt.
Saswati Bal, President, KISS also spoke on the  occasion.
Dr. P. K. Routray, CEO, KISS proposed vote of thanks.
Second H. M. Seervai Memorial Lecture at KIIT Law School
KIIT Law School, a constituent of KIIT University, organised the Second H. M. Seervai Memorial Lecture on 8th February 2010.
Hon'ble Justice J. S. Verma, Former Chief Justice of Supreme Court of India inaugurated the lecture, which highlighted the Fundamental Rights, Directive Principles of State Policy and Fundamental Duties.
These are vital elements of the Constitution of India that prescribe the fundamental obligations of the State towards its citizens as well as the duties of the citizens to the State, Hon'ble Justice Verma said, adding that these not only guide Government policy making, but also regulate the behaviour and conduct of citizens.
The Fundamental Rights, defined in Part III of the Constitution, guarantees the basic human rights to all citizens.
Similarly, the Fundamental Duties are defined as the moral obligations of all citizens to help promote the spirit of patriotism and to uphold the unity of India.
Common health should be covered under the good governance, Hon'ble Justice Verma stated.
Advising the students of KIIT Law School to be aware citizen, he said, the law for the minor crime and major crime should be equal.
Presiding over the lecture, Shri Hara Prasad Das, eminent layer and former Vice Chairman of State Administrative Tribunal, Orissa emphasized on the Fundamental Right.
Prof. Faizan Mustafa, Adviser, KIIT Law School and the V.C. of National Law University, Orissa introduced Justice Verma’s activities towards the justice of human rights, gender and social justice and judicial accountability.
Welcoming the guests, Dr. A. Samanta, Founder, KIIT said the students of KIIT Law School are very fortunate to be in the midst of a personality like Justice J. S. Verma.
This will surely prove to be an intellectually enriching experience for them.
At last, Prof. N. C. Chakrabarti, Director of KIIT Law School proposed the vote of thanks.
Many distinguished personalities from the fields of legal profession and politics attended the lecture.
KIIT signs MOU with Pokhara Univer sity, Nepal
KIIT University entered into a MOU with Pokhara University, established under Pokhara University Act, 1997 of Nepal on 3rd February 2010 at Kathmandu Nepal.
The MoU was signed by Dr. A. Samanta, Founder, KIIT  and Prof. Keshar J. Baral, Vice Chancellor, Pokhara University, Nepal.
KIIT Law School Organises Training Course for Cops
KIIT Law School, a constituent school of KIIT University, is organizing a five-day training course on 'Latest Rulings with Regard to Criminal Laws' for police officials.
The course, which is being organised in association with the Bureau of Police Research & Development, Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt.
of India, New Delhi, was inaugurated by Mr. M. Praharaj, Director General of Police, Orissa on 1st February 2010 and will continue till 5th February 2010.
Sri Satyajit Mohanty, Director, State Police Academy-cum-IGP Training, Odisha, Prof. B. B. Pande, Former Prof. of Criminal Law, Delhi University & Consultant, NHRC, New Delhi, Prof. N. L. Mitra, Former Director, National Law School of India University, Bangalore, Former Vice Chancellor, National Law University, Jodhpur and Chief Advisor, KIIT Law School, Dr. A. Samanta, Founder, KIIT & KISS, Prof. (Dr.) Faizan Mustafa, VC, National Law University, Orissa and Dr. N. K. Chakrabarti, Director, KIIT Law School also graced the inaugural ceremony.
Addressing the gathering, Mr. M Praharaj said that the course will apprise the participants about the court rulings relating to Criminal Procedure Code, human rights, etc.
It will also promote a comprehensive understanding of the ideals and goals of our Constitution, he said, while expressing confidence that it will be immensely beneficial for the participants.
While Police Universities have been established in Punjab and Gujarat, such institutions are not available in Orissa, Mr. Praharaj noted.
Expressing his happiness, Mr. Mohanty thanked Dr. Samanta for taken the initiative to organize this training course.
Study paten also have prepared to develop the knowledge about law for the cops, it will greatly help them accordingly the changing situation of law.
There is a need to include courses like this in the academic institutions throughout the country, because it provides basic knowledge to the cops, Prof. Pande opined.
Police service just like a social service, said Prof. Mitra.
Prof. (Dr.) Faizan Mustafa and Dr. Chakrabarti also spoke on the occasion.
Speaking on the occasion, Dr. Samanta extended heartiest gratitude to all the eminent personalities for gracing the inaugural ceremony of the course and throwing light upon the various aspects of this very important topic.
He also welcomed all the police officials participating in the course.
Among others, Prof. A. K. Jha, Registrar, KIIT and other senior officials were present on the occasion.