“The ravishing gardens at such good location in Paris”
Reviewed June 24, 2014
After Buttes de Chaumont and Luxembourg Gardens, these are the green espaces I most enjoyed.
They are situated really in the right place, along at its southern edge with the Seine, Rue de Rivoli follows its northern border, and from the west and east, they are, the Place de la Concorde and Place of Carrousel.
Wherever You take a glimpse at, You will see some of the greatest monuments in Paris, as the Place de la Concorde and further across the princely Champs Elysees to the magnificent Arc de Triomphe at the end of regal Elysees.
Also across the Seine, the eye catches the sights of the Invalides and Tour Eiffel with the Mars Fields and Trocadero with the Chaillot Palace.
I walked along and across the Gardens on the numerous pathways, alleys that intersect one with another orthogonally.
There are too, two ponds within it.
One is so called Bassin Octogonal and another, Grand Bassin Rond (Round, Circular).
Here on the benches and on metal chairs, beside the freshness of the pond's waters, You may relax and get rid of the all strains collected during the whole day in Paris.
That was Catherine de Medicis, that created these gardens as the Tuileries Palace in 1564, opened to the public in 1667 and became a public park only after the French Revolution.
So it took pretty much time to get over the royal property of the gardens to the final people possession of the same.
Rather long history of this very popular park among the Parisiens and foreigners span from the Henry IV all the way to the XX century.
Very important persons from the French history left the indelible traces of the human acting in the various fields of creating, like Auguste Rodin, Camille Pissarro, Edward Manet, Claude Monet and before them the urbanists, landscaping engineers, architects.
So lot knowledge was put inside the limits of this extraordinary place.
Visited July 2013
“A Great Place To Relax & Take In Paris Without The Pace”
Reviewed June 22, 2014
Our first visit to these gardens (across road from the Louvre) and we had a most relaxing hour and a half there sitting watching the fountains, people and just strolling slowly around.
Simply a great place to spend time in Paris.
Grab a motorbike taxi for a ride around Paris at the Place de la Concorde end of the park.
Spending time here helps to sooth the brain and tired legs from the hussle and bustle of being a tourist in Paris.
Even better if you get a mild but warm sunny day as we did.
Visited June 2014
“Relaxing at the Tuileries”
Reviewed June 21, 2014
The Jardins des Tuileries can be found in one of my favourite parts of Paris, on rue de Rivoli between Place de la Concorde and the Louvre.
Although it's a very busy park, there are many seats where you can sit and relax with music, a book, or your lunch.
Sailing model boats is a popular pastime and, of course, there are beautiful displays of plants to enjoy.
I like visiting in the summer best of all, between late June and August when an annual funfair, the Fête des Tuileries, takes place.
This is always very busy and crowded, but it's a lot of fun.
Try your skill at the various stalls to win prizes, enjoy plenty of things to eat and drink, including ice-cream and candyfloss, or get made up as a clown.
The carnival rides range from fairly sedate little ones to the frantic V Maxx and the legendary, "ejection seat", La Boule, which has to be seen to be believed.
Also present is the ubiquitous ferris wheel, with fantastic views over the area.
There's something for everyone at the Tuileries.
Visited September 2013