Review of Chateau de Chenonceau
00 33 02 47 23 90 07
Website
Small-Group Half-Day Tour to Chenonceau and Da Vinci Clos Lucé Castles
See more tours on Viator
Certificate of Excellence
What is Certificate of Excellence?
TripAdvisor gives a Certificate of Excellence to accommodations, attractions and restaurants that consistently earn great reviews from travelers.
Owner description: Beautiful country villa surrounded by a moat and inspired by the Italian Renaissance.
Sponsored links *
“My favorite Chateau”
Reviewed July 13, 2015
Great chateau that goes across the river.
It's beautiful but smaller then most.
Takes about 40 mins to drive from Blois.
Well worth the visit and you'll spend about 2 hours there.
Visited July 2015
Ask rdougperry about Chateau de Chenonceau
This review is the subjective opinion of a TripAdvisor member and not of TripAdvisor LLC.
4,227 reviews from our community
Visitor rating
“Iconic Chateau”
Reviewed July 13, 2015
This is one of the most historic and scenic chateaus in the Loire Valley.
It is truly iconic.
There are about 1,000 chateaus in the Valley and this is one of the top five.
It has been historic since it was built and has been all the way through WWII when it sat on the border of Vichey France and Germany.
It is a must see!!!
Visited July 2015
Ask CherokeeMan about Chateau de Chenonceau
This review is the subjective opinion of a TripAdvisor member and not of TripAdvisor LLC.
Virginia M
Reviewed July 13, 2015 via mobile
We loved our visit to this unusual chateau.
It is charming, historical, beautiful, and memorable!
We arrived right when it opened and avoided all the crowds.
Get the audio guide.
Definitely worth it.
The floral arrangements and gardens alone are worth the stop.
You will be oh so glad you did, but be sure to go either early, early, or Katrina the day.
Mid day was very busy.
Visited May 2015
Ask Virginia M about Chateau de Chenonceau
This review is the subjective opinion of a TripAdvisor member and not of TripAdvisor LLC.
IMUK
“Idyllic setting”
Reviewed July 13, 2015
Beautiful chateau and gardens in an idyllic setting.
Good café on site, and pleasant walks along the river.
You could easily spend a full day relaxing here and enjoying the castle and grounds, or make the most of a couple of hours if your time is more limited.
Follow the signs, rather than your sat-nav if it tells you something different, as the entrance from the South is closed.
As with most historic buildings, not buggy/wheelchair friendly.
Visited July 2015
Ask IMUK about Chateau de Chenonceau
This review is the subjective opinion of a TripAdvisor member and not of TripAdvisor LLC.
wwhughesjr
“Fascinating”
Reviewed July 13, 2015
We arrived just before opening time and there were very few people there.
We used the Rick Steves book to go through the chateau and it was all I needed.
The walk through tour was well done and since the tour busses had not arrived, we had all the time and space we wanted or needed.
The display case in the Medici gallery gives a good explanation of the history of the chateau.
We also enjoyed watching some of the artisans/restorationists work on some gold leaf repair in a second floor room.
The art work and the furnishings are beautiful and give an excellent picture of what life might have been like at Chenonceau.
The gardens were small but well-designed and easy to manage.
In one of the out buildings a static display showed what Chenonceau may have looked like when it served as a hospital during WWI.
Thoroughly enjoyed our 2 hour visit, much more than our visit later the same day to Chambord.
Visited May 2015