week 15 keywords - Flashcards
Flashcard Deck Information
Class: HIEU 2001 - Western Civilization I
Subject: History-European History
University: University of Virginia
Term: Fall 2009
List View: Terms & Definitions
Christian Humanism
Christian Humanism is the belief that human freedom and individualism are intrinsic (natural) parts of, or are at least compatible with, Christian doctrine and practice.
Erasmus 
Desiderius Erasmus Roterodamus (October 27, 1466/1469, Rotterdam - July 12, 1536, Basel) was a Dutch Renaissance humanist and a Catholic theologian.
Martin Luther
Martin Luther (10 November 1483 - 18 February 1546) initiated the Protestant Reformation. 
saw all of the bad things the church was doing and suggested a change.
95 Theses
The Ninety-Five Theses on the Power and Efficacy of Indulgences (), commonly known as The Ninety-Five Theses, were written by Martin Luther in 1517 and are widely regarded as the primary catalyst for the Protestant Reformation.
sola fides
The doctrine of sola fide or "by faith alone" asserts God's pardon for guilty sinners is granted to and received through faith or belief alone, to the exclusion of all human efforts or works. 
-with this now in thought, it meant that u can't buy your salvation through the church.
John Calvin
John Calvin (; 10 July 1509 - 27 May 1564) was an influential French theologian and pastor during the Protestant Reformation.
predestination
Predestination is a religious concept, which involves the relationship between God and his creation. 
you are already chosen for heaven or hell.
Anabaptists
Anabaptists are Christians of the Radical Reformation. 
Anabaptists rejected conventional Christian practices such as wearing wedding rings, taking oaths, and participating in civil government. They adhered to a literal interpretation   of the Sermon on the Mount and Believer's baptism. The name Anabaptist is derived from this, because credobaptism was considered heresy by all other major Christian denominations at the time of the reformation period. As a result, Anabaptists were heavily persecuted during th
Charles V
Charles V (German: Karl V, Spanish: Carlos I or Carlos V, Dutch: Karel V, 24 February 1500 - 21 September 1558) was ruler of the Holy Roman Empire from 1519 and, as Charles I of Spain, of the Spanish realms from 1506 until his abdication in 1556. On the eve of his death in 1558, his realm, which has been described as one in which the sun never sets, spanned almost 4 million square kilometers.
-he was anti-the reform 1521.
Peace of Augsburg
The Peace of Augsburg was a treaty between Charles V and the forces of the Schmalkaldic League, an alliance of Lutheran princes, on September 25, 1555, at the imperial city of Augsburg, now in present-day Bavaria, Germany.
a compromise about Germany. each territorial lord had the right to determine the official religion of his own territory. (as long as not Calvinist or Anabaptist.
Henry VIII of England
Henry VIII (28 June 1491 - 28 January 1547) was King of England from 21 April 1509 until his death. 
had 6 wives. had problems with divorce and the Pope. Declares himself the head of the English church. all kings disliked popes interference too. now making heresy treason against the king.
Church of England
The Church of England is the officially established Christian church in England, the Mother Church of the worldwide Anglican Communion and the oldest among the communion's thirty-eight independent national and regional churches.
Catholic, or Counter, Reformation
-the church's response and fixing of the church.
Council of Trent
The Council of Trent was the 16th-century Ecumenical Council of the Roman Catholic Church. 
1545-1563. had 3 sessions with breaks in between. 1.to decide if peace and unity within the church could be restored. 2.reform of the church- institutions and structures 3.Clarification of Doctrine. had to make sure of consistency within doctrines and scripture.
Ignatius of Loyola
Saint Ignatius of Loyola (, ), (1491July 31, 1556) was a Spanish knight, who became a hermit and priest, founding the Society of Jesus and becoming its first Superior General.
Society of Jesus
The Society of Jesus is a Catholic religious order of clerks regular whose members are called Jesuits.
men dedicate themselves and live under certain rules while trying to achieve spiritual purity.
Divine right of kings
-other kings were bound to the law
-kings given power by god had no boundary - absolutism -people accepted it because they were tired of political fighting.
Catherine de Medici
Catherine de' Medici (13 April 1519 - 5 January 1589) was born in Florence, Italy, as Caterina Maria Romula di Lorenzo de' Medici. Queen widow of France.
Huguenots
The Huguenots were members of the Protestant Reformed Church of France (or French Calvinists) from the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries. 
had tension with the french catholics
St Bartholomew's Day Massacre
in 1572 was a targeted group of assassinations, followed by a wave of Roman Catholic mob violence, both directed against the Huguenots (French Calvinist Protestants), during the French Wars of Religion. Traditionally believed to have been instigated by Catherine de' Medici, the mother of King Charles IX, the massacre took place six days after the wedding of the king's sister to the Protestant Henry III of Navarre (the future Henry IV of France). This marriage was an occasion for which many of the most wealt
Thirty Years' War
The Thirty Years' War (1618-1648) was one of the most destructive conflicts in European history. The war was fought primarily in Germany and at various points involved most of the countries of Europe. Initially the war was fought largely as a religious conflict between Protestants and Catholics in the Holy Roman Empire, although disputes over the internal politics and balance of power within the Empire played a significant part.
Peace of Westphalia
-ends 30 yrs war. 
-allows for Calvinist, Lutheran, and Catholic estates. ends the large scale confessional violence. now the concept of religious toleration emerges. The term Peace of Westphalia denotes the two French-language peace treaties of Osnabrck (15 May 1648) and Mnster (24 October 1648) that ended the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648) in the Holy Roman Empire.