APR
JUN
OCT
6
2015
2016
2017
11 captures
5 Sep 15 - 10 Oct 16
Close Help
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
Catherine de Médicis
Queen of France
Written by: N.M. Sutherland
Read
View All Media (2)
Table of Contents
Introduction
Early life
Political crises
Civil wars
The Massacre of St. Bartholomew’s Day
Last years
Catherine de MédicisGiraudon/Art Resource, New York
Catherine de Médicis, Italian Caterina de’ Medici (born April 13, 1519, Florence [Italy]—died January 5, 1589, Blois , France) queen consort of Henry II of France (reigned 1547–59) and subsequently regent of France (1560–74), who was one of the most influential personalities of the Catholic–Huguenot wars . Three of her sons were kings of France: Francis II , Charles IX , and Henry III .
Early life
Catherine was the daughter of Lorenzo di Piero de’ Medici, duca di Urbino , and Madeleine de La Tour d’Auvergne, a Bourbon princess related to many of the French nobility. Orphaned within days, Catherine was highly educated, trained, and disciplined ... (100 of 1,707 words)
Images
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
©2016 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
MEDIA FOR:
Catherine de Médicis
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email. Try again later.
Citations
MLA style:
"Catherine de Medicis". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016. Web. 06 Jun. 2016
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Catherine-de-Medicis>.
APA style:
Catherine de Medicis. (2016). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/biography/Catherine-de-Medicis
Harvard style:
Catherine de Medicis. 2016. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Retrieved 06 June, 2016, from http://www.britannica.com/biography/Catherine-de-Medicis
Chicago Manual of Style:
Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "Catherine de Medicis", accessed June 06, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/biography/Catherine-de-Medicis.
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Update
Link
Click anywhere inside the article to add text or insert superscripts, subscripts, and special characters.
You can also highlight a section and use the tools in this bar to modify existing content:
Add links to related Britannica articles!
You can double-click any word or highlight a word or phrase in the text below and then select an article from the search box.
Or, simply highlight a word or phrase in the article, then enter the article name or term you'd like to link to in the search box below, and select from the list of results.
Note: we do not allow links to external resources in editor.
Please click the Web sites link for this article to add citations for
external Web sites.
Editing Tools:
Table of Contents
Tips for Editing
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles.
You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind:
Encyclopaedia Britannica articles are written in a neutral, objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
Email this page
Cancel
Send
×