APR
MAY
AUG
30
2015
2016
2017
5 captures
5 Sep 15 - 4 Aug 16
Close Help
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
Chenonceaux
France
Read
View History
Edit
Feedback
Chenonceaux,
Chenonceaux, Château deRay Manley/Shostal Associates village, Indre-et-Loire département, Centre région, west-central France, on the right bank of the Cher River . Chenonceaux is famous for its château, which bridges the Cher. Founded on the pilings of a mill in 1513 or 1515 by Thomas Bohier, financial minister in Normandy, the château was completed in 1522 and represents a type of architecture transitional between Gothic and Renaissance. An isolated tower flanking a drawbridge is part of an earlier building of the 15th century. The château was confiscated by Francis I in 1535. Henry II presented it to his mistress Diane de Poitiers, who on his death was forced by his queen, Catherine de Médicis , to exchange it for Chaumont-sur-Loire. Catherine built the gallery that leads to the left bank of the Cher. Son et lumière (French: “sound and light”) displays, using varicoloured lights and historical sound track, are now produced at the château. Chenonceaux was extensively restored in the 19th century. The village was occupied by the Germans and slightly damaged in World War II. It lies amid a region of viticulture. Pop. (1999) 325; (2008 prelim.) 339.
Share
Share:
Email
Print
Cite
Feedback
Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your Feedback . To propose your own edits, go to Edit Mode .
You may also be interested in...
Tours
Amboise
Chinon
Azay-le-Rideau
Villandry
Loches
Langeais
Vierzon
Europe
Orléans
Chartres
Blois
Keep exploring
Exploring Italy and France: Fact or Fiction?
Exploring France: Fact or Fiction?
Capitals & Cities: Fact or Fiction?
7 Drugs that Changed the World
Editor Picks: 10 Best Sports Rivalries of All Time
Email this page
Cancel
Send
Britannica Stories
In The News / Philosophy & Religion
Aristotle’s Tomb Found?
Demystified / Science
Will a Suction Cup Work in Space?
Spotlight / Society
Celebrating Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders
See All Stories
BRITANNICA QUIZZES
What Kind of Animal?
Extrasolar Planets
Geography of India
See More Quizzes
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
©2016 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Citations
MLA style:
"Chenonceaux". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016. Web. 30 May. 2016
<http://www.britannica.com/place/Chenonceaux>.
APA style:
Chenonceaux. (2016). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/place/Chenonceaux
Harvard style:
Chenonceaux. 2016. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Retrieved 30 May, 2016, from http://www.britannica.com/place/Chenonceaux
Chicago Manual of Style:
Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "Chenonceaux", accessed May 30, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/place/Chenonceaux.
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Update
Link
Click anywhere inside the article to add text or insert superscripts, subscripts, and special characters.
You can also highlight a section and use the tools in this bar to modify existing content:
Add links to related Britannica articles!
You can double-click any word or highlight a word or phrase in the text below and then select an article from the search box.
Or, simply highlight a word or phrase in the article, then enter the article name or term you'd like to link to in the search box below, and select from the list of results.
Note: we do not allow links to external resources in editor.
Please click the Web sites link for this article to add citations for
external Web sites.
Editing Tools:
Tips for Editing
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles.
You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind:
Encyclopaedia Britannica articles are written in a neutral, objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
MEDIA FOR:
Chenonceaux
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email. Try again later.
×