Buckingham Palace to be lit every night, despite energy concerns
Search Forums
Originally Posted by senor
It isnt owned by the royal family at all.
BP is generally regarded as state property cos its the official residence of the head of state & we are paying for its upkeep
but i think its one of those that comes under 'ambiguous' in the event of the monarchy getting abolished & what mrs windsor gets to keep.
BP was bought by George III for £28000 in 1761, so she would have a good case for arguing that she gets to keep it.
we might have to ask if shes got a receipt though.
 
Please sign in or register to remove this advertisement.
24-10-2006, 19:49
Quote:
Originally Posted by Ovalteenie
BP is generally regarded as state property cos its the official residence of the head of state & we are paying for its upkeep
but i think its one of those that comes under 'ambiguous' in the event of the monarchy getting abolished & what mrs windsor gets to keep.
BP was bought by George III for £28000 in 1761, so she would have a good case for arguing that she gets to keep it.
we might have to ask if shes got a receipt though.
The queen owns Sandringham and Balmoral. George III agreed to hand over the Crown Estates in return for a yearly sum (Civil List). George originally bought it from the Duke Of Buckingham and it was called Buckingham House
 
Location: Southern East Anglia
Posts: 70,739
A glance round all the neon signs in the West End on any given night, will make you realise that singling out Buck House for criticism, is totally wrong.
 
Quote:
Originally Posted by summerflowers
I'm guessing that people have more of a problem with the 'tax payer' bit and the fact that its for the Royals rather than anything environmental
Well actually if people had a look they will find the Queen is not that often staying overnight at Buckingham Palace , she is more often at Windsor , I doubt she has personally decided to light up her outside walls at night.
As for the tax payer bit well the Government constantly revels in releasing the Civil List 9 the salary paid ion return for the proceeds of the Crown estate being handed to the Treasury ) paid to the Royals which stands at £37 million. Out of that £37 million , actually only £ 11.2 million goes on the civil list which covers the expenses of the royal family and the cost of staff and the running of establishments.
Now even if we did not have a Royal Family , the staff and offices would still be run as they would probably be serving a President instead.
Then the rest of the expenses to make it up to £37 million wich are £ 28,800,000.00 would still be needed if we had a President as these are for various costs including State visits by the Head of State , various functions here in the UK ordered by the Government which would be held by a President instead.
The turnover of the Crown Estate in 2005 was £245.4 million ,after all costs , taxes etc were deducted the profit handed over to the treasury was £ 184.8 million an increase of 4.5 % on 2004.
So in real terms if you take the profit of £184.8 million minus the costs of the Royal Family as they are called ) of £37 million and remember we would still have most of these costs with a President ) then they actually did not cost us anything , in fact they contributed £147.8 million .
As for the lights outside Buckingham Palace , I doubt very much it was the Queens idea if it was she would have done it years ago . When it comes to power and looking to the future there is  already  a hydro electric plant built to power Windsor Castle.