Name few kings & queens that were born in Placentia palace ?
Henry VIII  -  Mary I  -  Elizabeth I
Who demolished Placentia palace ?
What stands now where Placentia Palace used to be ?
The Old Royal Naval College
Who did Henry VIII marry in Placentia palace ?
1540  -  Anne of Cleves
What happened to Placentia palace during the English Civil War ?
Biscuit factory and a prisoner-of-war camp
Which king die in Placentia palace ?
Edward VI
Which is the most senior royal palace in the United Kingdom ?
St James's palace
What still happens in St Jame's palace ?
Ambassadors and high commissioners are still accredited here  -   meeting place of the Accession Council
Who's christening took place at St Jame's Palace in 2013 ?
Prince George
Who built St Jame's palace ?
Henry VIII on the site of a leper hospital
Who gave St Jame's palace in 1638 & to who ?
1638, Charles I gave the palace to Marie de Medici  -   mother Henrietta Maria
Where did Charles I spent his final night before his execution ?
At St James's
What did Oliver Cromwell do with St Jame's palace ?
Turned it into barracks during the English Commonwealth
Name kings & queens that were born in St Jame's palace ?
Charles II  -  James II  -   Mary II  -  Anne  -  George IV
Name the 2 monarchs of the House of Hanover used St James's Palace as their principal London residence ?
George I  -  George II
In 1757, George II donated what while living in St Jame's palace ?
The Palace library to the British Museum
Who in 1762 purchased Buckingham House ?
George III  for Queen Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz
Which is the London residence and principal workplace of the Queen ?
Buckingham palace
What occasions take place at Buckingham palace ?
The centre of state occasions and royal hospitality  -  A focus for the British people at times of national rejoicing
What did William IV consider in 1834 after the fire of the Houses of Parliament ?
Converting Buckingham palace into the new Houses of Parliament
When did Buckingham Palace finally became the principal royal residence ?
1837 -  on the accession of Queen Victoria was the first monarch to reside there
Where is the largest privet garden in London ?
Buckingham Palace, 40 acres  -  includes a helicopter landing area, a lake,  tennis court  -  summer tea parties
Name 2 christening in Buckingham Palace ?
Prince Charles  -  Prince William
Who developed Hampton Court Palace & who seized it from him ?
Cardinal Wolsey  -  Henry VIII seized it and later enlarged it
Which king was born in Hampton Court Palace ?
Edward VI
Which Queen spent 2 phantom pregnancies in Hampton Court Palace ?
Mary I
Which Queen died in Hampton Court Palace ?
Jane Seymour  -  Anne of Denmark
Who was the last monarch to reside in Hampton Court Palace ?
King George II
What can be seen on the grounds of Hampton Court Palace ?
Maze  -  Real tennis court  -  huge grape vine, the largest in the world, planted  -  1769 Capability Brown
What can be seen in July in Hampton Court ?
Hampton Court Palace Flower Show
Who was christened in Hampton Court & who was the godfather & godmother ?
Edward VI  -  Archbishop Thomas Cranmer  -  Lady Mary ( future Mary I )
What can be seen above Anne Boleyn's gate in Hampton Court ?
Astronomical clock, made for Henry VIII in 1540 by Nicholas Oursian
What can be seen in The Great Hall at Hampton Court ?
Hammer-beam roof  -
Who spent their honeymoon at Hampton Court after getting married in Winchester ?
Mary I & Philip of Spain
What took place at at Hampton Court in 1604 ?
The Hampton Court Conference led to King James Version of the Bible
Hampton Court was palace and prison to who ?
Charles I
How many rooms are there in Buckingham Palace ?
775   -  77,000  m2   -   78 bathrooms
How many people work in Buckingham Palace ?
800 members of staff
How many of George III children were born in Queen's House, future Buckingham Palace ?
14 out of 15  -  George IV born in St James's
Which monarch was first to step out onto the balcony in Buckingham Palace ?
Queen Victoria  in 1851 during celebrations for the opening of the Great Exhibition
Which monarch was born in Buckingham Palace ?
Edward VII  -  William IV was also born at Buckingham House
What did suffragettes do in 1914 in Buckingham Palace ?
Chained themselves to the Palace railings
When was Buckingham Palace bombed ?
WWII  -  1 policemen died
Which flag flies over Buckingham Palace ?
Royal Standard when the Queen is present  -  Union Jack when the Queen is away
Buckingham Palace has its own ?
Chapel, post office, swimming pool, staff cafeteria, doctor's surgery & cinema
What is Buckingham Palace's postcode ?
SW1A 1AA
When is Buckingham Palace open to the public ?
August and September
Where was Queen Elizabeth II proclaimed Queen & gave here first speech as Queen ?
St James's Palace
What happened in 1809 in St Jame's Palace ?
A fire destroyed parts of the structure
Which paintings by Peter Lely can be seen at Hampton Court Palace ?
The Windsor Beauties
Who was the Fountain Court in Hampton Court Palace designed by Christopher Wren for ?
William III & Mary II
Which gardener laid out the grounds for Queen Anne in Hampton Court ?
Henry Wise
Who purchased and built Kensington Palace ?
William III  -  he suffered from asthma
Where did George II die ?
Kensington Palace on the toilet
Which monarchs died at Kensington Palace ?
William III  -  Mary II  -  Queen Anne  -  George II
Which Queen was born in Kensington Palace ?
Queen Victoria
Name some royals who live in  Kensington Palace ?
The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge  - Prince Harry  -  the Duke and Duchess of Kent
Kensington Palace was the setting of the final argument between who ?
Sarah, Duchess of Marlborough and Queen Anne
Where did Victoria hold her first privy council ?
Red Saloon Kensington palace
Who's statue stands outside Kensington Palace ?
Queen Victoria