Review of Buckingham Palace
Buckingham Palace Road, London SW1A 1AA, England (Westminster)
443031237300
London in One Day Sightseeing Tour including...
See more tours on Viator
More attraction details
Attraction details
Owner description: Buckingham Palace serves as both the office and London residence of Her Majesty The Queen.
It is one of the few working royal palaces remaining in the world today.
During a visit to Buckingham Palace, visitors can see the nineteen magnificent State Rooms, which provide the setting for ceremonial occasions and official entertaining.
All rooms are furnished with many of the greatest treasures from the Royal Collection.
A visit also includes entry to the special exhibition, A Royal Welcome.
Sponsored links *
“Dull”
Reviewed December 17, 2014
The unmistakeable Buckingham Palace is the London residence and principal workplace of the monarchy of the United Kingdom.
Built in 1703, the building is quite plain and dull and unsurprisingly surrounded by fencing on all sides.
It is also always covered in tourists and a flock of diseased looking pigeons.
Unfortunately, the Queen is presently in residence and internal tours were not allowed when we were there making it a mere 30 minute compulsory tourist stop, essentially to tick the ‘done’ box.
Visited October 2014
Ask Rowan H about Buckingham Palace
This review is the subjective opinion of a TripAdvisor member and not of TripAdvisor LLC.
11,523 reviews from our community
Visitor rating
“Don't go around December”
Reviewed December 17, 2014
Happened to be there to see changing of the guards.
As it is December there were droves of people around who had already taken every available vantage point.
Probably best to visit outside of December and the Christmas period for a nicer time.
Barely got a glimpse of the process.
Visited December 2014
Ask Lici J about Buckingham Palace
This review is the subjective opinion of a TripAdvisor member and not of TripAdvisor LLC.
Joe W
New York City, New York
Level
“Changing of the guard fun to watch”
Reviewed December 17, 2014
The changing of the guard at Buckingham Palace is a fun and great thing to see if you have enough time.
It can get very crowded: I arrived at 10:30 am and it was already too packed to get a good view up by the fence, so I stood on the Victoria Monument to get a better view.
It is a nice spectacle and it would be very fun for children to see.
That being said, I don't think it is necessarily a must-see.
I didn't take a tour of the palace itself so I can't comment on that, but I had fun watching all of the ceremony.
Definitely arrive early if you want to get a good view right up by the fence.
Visited December 2014
Ask Joe W about Buckingham Palace
This review is the subjective opinion of a TripAdvisor member and not of TripAdvisor LLC.
3406E
“Happy to have visited it”
Reviewed December 16, 2014
Buckingham Palace is very regal & elegant.
It was great to visit one of our Head of State's official palaces & although we missed the changing of the guard, it was still fantastic.
One thing that you may have to clarify though, several internet sites & comments from local tour operators will claim that the changing of the guard is on an even numbered day.
I can speak from personal experience that the changing of the guard is on an ODD numbered day & if it is raining-it don't happen either.
No dramas though as the we had to visit was the 24/11/14 & the day before it was a top day in London (not, rained all day) so we missed out there.
A bonus was though, a horse cavalry proceeded between Buckingham Palace & The Victoria Memorial.Quite spectacular & was a great consolation for missing the changing of the guard.
Loads of people there & we where there on the off season, so just be patient to get a photo.
Visited November 2014