Top 10 London for First timers
Melbourne Trip Day 2: Puffing Billy, Royal Exhibition Centre, State Library, China Town,, Carlton and more !
Sydney
Melbourne Trip Day 2: Puffing Billy, Royal Exhibition Centre, State Library, China Town,, Carlton and more !
Sydney
Globetrotting while Working Full Time
Home London Top 10 London for First timers
Top 10 London for First timers
written by That Girl March 20, 2016
If you know me well, you would know how much I love London. If there is any place I would like to settle down, apart from India, it has to be London. I had been to London for a week along with my family, almost 3.5 years back. While revisiting the memories, I noticed how being first timers, we had been to most of the must visit places. And hence, out of the many places we had been to, I give you my very own Top 10 places in London, which you shouldn’t miss if you are a first timer ! 🙂
1. Big Ben and the Houses of Parliament
The first glimpse of this structure over awes you. On our first day, we spent quite sometime just looking at the structure – the features, the architecture and the clock. Surely, we were having that ‘Yes, we are in London’ moment and that feeling sunk in best when in front of this huge building.
2. Westminster Abbey – Adore the interiors
Who would want to miss the place where Prince William and Katherine Middleton got married ? We were absolutely spell bound by the interiors of this church.  It is one of the most notable religious buildings in the United Kingdom and has been the traditional place of coronation and burial site for English and, later, British monarchs.
3. Buckingham Palace – Visit Queen & See Change of Guards
Buckingham Palace is the London residence and principal workplace of the reigning monarch of the United Kingdom. You don’t want to miss the Changing of Guards ceremony. The Forecourt of Buckingham Palace is used for Changing of the Guard, a major ceremony and tourist attraction (daily from April to July; every other day in other months).
4. London Zoo – Ponder at meditating Llamas
London Zoo is the world’s oldest scientific zoo . It was opened in London in 1828. You will find hundreds of varieties of mammals, birds, amphibians and more. What I loved the most were the cute Llamas. You can spend hours just watching them. Also penguins – the cutest ones are there in this zoo.
5. Windsor Castle – Pose with a Guard
Windsor Castle is the Queen’s royal residence in the English county of Berkshire. The original castle was built in the 11th century. It goes without saying that you would love to pose with the stoic guards there. But beware, don’t mess with them, or this could happen with you.
6. Trafalgar Square – Climb up the Lion(s)
Trafalgar Square is a public square in the Central London, built around the area formerly known as Charing Cross. Its name commemorates the Battle of Trafalgar, a British naval victory in the Napoleonic Wars with France and Spain that took place in 1805. This place is surrounded by museums, galleries, cultural spaces and historic buildings. Nelson’s Column at it’s centre is guarded by four lion statues. You can climb up these lions. But my experience says, it is impossible to climb the lions here and retain your dignity. But again, where else can you sit on a lion?
7. Pose with any of the iconic telephone booths
The red telephone box, a telephone kiosk for a public telephone designed by Sir Giles Gilbert Scott, was a familiar sight on the streets of London. Despite a reduction in their numbers in recent years, the traditional British red telephone kiosk can still be seen in many places throughout London. The colour red was chosen to make them easy to spot. You HAVE to click a picture here.
8. London Eye – Ogle at it or from it !
The London Eye is a giant Ferris wheel on the South Bank of the River Thames in London. When erected in 1999 it was the world’s tallest Ferris wheel. The Eye has done for London what the Eiffel Tower did for Paris, which is to give it a symbol and to let people climb above the city and look back down on it. Watching both from it and at it are trip worthy.
9. Harrods – Buy something – tea bags at the very least !
Harrods is an upmarket department store located in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea. Just say the word ‘ Harrods ’ and images of stylish luxury fill my mind from Yves Saint Laurent couture to Steiff teddy bears, not forgetting, the famous food halls of this, the largest department store in Europe.  Covering over 4.5 acres and spread across 5 floors, it is easy to get lost here! It gives you a symbol a luxury identity. When in London, don’t miss out going on a luxury shopping spree in Harrods. If nothing else, definitely buy their tea bags!
10. Tower Bridge – See it falling down and going up again
Tower Bridge (built 1886–1894) is a combined bascule and suspension bridge in London. The bridge crosses the River Thames close to the Tower of London and has become an iconic symbol of London. It is spectacular to watch the bridge opening to let the tall ships pass by and then closing again to resume vehicular traffic. We went there almost everyday.
Have you been to London? Are there any other tips you would like to add? I would be glad to know about your experience! 
If you enjoy reading my posts, please like & follow my  Facebook ,  Instagram  and   Twitter  Page to get regular updates of That Girl’s Life Stories! 
Top 10 London for First timers was last modified: April 6th, 2016 by That Girl