We visit Buckingham Palace on our Westminster and All-in-One London Tours or do it yourself with our guide to the surrounding area .
Where is Buckingham Palace?
Buckingham Palace is located in the City of Westminster in London.
The palace is easily accessed by several London Underground stations, including Green Park (Jubilee, Piccadilly and Victoria lines), Hyde Park Corner (serviced by the Piccadilly line), Victoria (serviced by Circle, District and Victoria lines) and St. James’s Park (District and Circle lines).
The palace is also within walking distance from Charing Cross (Bakerloo and Northern lines).
We recommend using this Google map for directions to Buckingham Palace from anywhere in London.
All Year Round
Queens Gallery –
Originally designed by John Nash, the Queen’s Gallery showcases art, artefacts and treasures all year ‘round.
Different exhibitions rotate in the Gallery all throughout the year.
Opening Times:
Daily 10:00 to 5:30pm
Prices:
TIP: Entry to the Queen’s Gallery, Royal Mews and State Rooms is included in the London Pass .
Adult – £9.75
Summer Opening Only
State Rooms –
Throughout the month of August and September, Queen Elizabeth II usually goes on holiday.
This is good news for visitors to London as it means that the State Rooms of Buckingham Palace open their doors to the public!
Visitors to the Palace can purchase tickets which include an audio-guide tour that will lead them through over a dozen different rooms in the Palace.
The total tour runs for about 2 hours and highlights the fine art that is displayed at the Palace, as well as the world-famous throne room (where all official wedding and coronation photos are taken), and finishing with a lovely stroll through the largest private garden in London!
Only available for guests 8 weeks out of the entire year, be sure to plan yourself a visit to the Palace during this rare opportunity to get behind-the-scenes of the Queen’s London home!
Opening Dates: 26th July – 28th September
Opening Times:
9:30 – 7:30 (July to 21 August)
9:30 – 6:30 (September)
Prices:
TIP: Entry to the Queen’s Gallery, Royal Mews and State Rooms is  included in the London Pass .
Adult – £34.50
Under 5 – Free
Family (2 adults and 3 under 17s) – £88.50
2014 Exhibition: Royal Childhood – Providing a glimpse into the childhood of Queen Elizabeth and her sister Margaret, as well as other members of the Royal family, including baby Prince George!
Artefacts from 250 year of history will be on display.
Royal Day Out
This is a single ticket that gives the holder entrance to The State Rooms, The Queen’s Gallery and the Royal Mews.
Great value for money!
Adult – £34.50
Under 17 – £19.50
Under 5 – FREE
Note: All tickets to the State Rooms can be stamped on exit and reused throughout the summer!
Location
Centuries ago, the land surrounding Buckingham Palace was owned by Norman kings, who eventually gifted the area to Westminster Abbey.
In the early 10th century the area was home to a little village known as Eye Cross that grew up around the river Tyburn – which at that time flowed through this area of London.
In the 16th century Henry VIII bought the land, which by then housed a leper hospital, and for centuries on this prime piece of location traded between royal and noble hands.
It is thought that the first house to be built on this site belonged to a Sir William Blake in the 1620’s, but Buckingham Palace as we know it today began nearly another century after this initial house.
The Creation of the Palace
Making up the architectural skeleton for the Buckingham Palace that is so well known today was a building known as Buckingham House.
Buckingham House was built by the 1st Duke of Buckingham and it was a descendant of his, Sir Charles Sheffield, that eventually sold the building to the royal family – in whose hands it has remained ever since.
Buckingham House was actually sold in 1761 to King George III at a cost of only £21,000!
(Although today that is more like £2.8million…which is still a bargain for property of this size in London!)
.
George III and his wife Charlotte moved into Buckingham House and 14 of their 15 children were born inside.
The public, however, were not impressed with the fact that their King and Queen were living in a manor house – although George III was famous for his simple tastes.
To appease public appetite for pomp and splendour, the royal couple expanded the house and their son, George IV, continued renovations into the 1820’s.
After George died, his brother, King William IV who did not care much for the Palace, considered moving Parliament into the building!
As A Primary Royal Residence
It is Queen Victoria who is most often credited with being the first monarch to proclaim Buckingham palace as their official residence.
She moved in shortly after she came to the throne in 1837 and her husband, Albert, is credited with modernising the building to the standard we know today.
Before Albert took on the task, Buckingham Palace was notoriously uncomfortable: the chimneys were in such disrepair that they spread smoke throughout the building which meant that fires stopped being lit which, in turn, made Buckingham Palace a rather beautiful ice box!
It was said that the staff that took care of the Palace were lazy and that hygiene was not up to standard which meant that the Palace was extremely dirty.
However, once Albert was done with his work, the Palace was widely accepted as a wonderful home for the monarch and it was during Albert’s work that the famous East Front balcony was built – setting the stage for public displays of the royal family for decades to come.
Today
In addition to being the London residence of the Queen, Buckingham Palace hosts events and ceremonies all throughout the year.
It is in Buckingham Palace that the Queen confers knighthoods to those deemed worthy, where state banquets are held, where christenings for members of the royal family often take place, and where visiting heads of state are entertained.
The Palace backs onto the largest private garden in London – over 40acres where the Queen’s annual garden parties are held every summer.
Today, in addition to Queen Elizabeth herself, the Duke of York, and the Earl and Countess of Wessex (the Queen’s two sons and daughter-in-law) call Buckingham Palace home.
The Palace is decorated with many fine paintings and works of art.
In addition to this, every gift that the Queen has been given throughout her reign from nations and people around the world, are displayed throughout the Palace.
Fast Facts
Dimensions: 108m x 120m x 24m/354ft x 393ft x 78ft
Floor space: 77,000m sq/830,000 sq ft.
Number of Rooms: 775 (78 of which are bathrooms!)
Largest Room: The Ballroom – 36.6m x 18m x 13.5m/ 120ft x 59ft x 193ft
Number of Windows: 760
Number of Light bulbs: 40,000
Members of Staff currently employed at the Palace: 450 year round – 800 summer opening
Born Inside: King Edward VII, King William IV, Prince Charles and Prince Andrew
Postcode: SW1A 1AA