This is why Buckingham Palace needs a £150 million refurbishment: Pictures show shocking state of disrepair
10:50, 24 Jun 2015
12:42, 24 Jun 2015
By Kirstie McCrum
The Queen's official London residence hasn't been decorated since before 1952, and it's beginning to show signs of wear and tear
  Shares
VIEW GALLERY
The £150 million of repairs to Buckingham Palace may have come as a surprise, but the famous London landmark is in a state of disrepair which is even more shocking.
The building hasn't been decorated since before Queen Elizabeth II ascended the throne in 1952, and there is work to be done on the building first used as a palace by her great-great-grandmother Queen Victoria.
Click to play
The Live Event you are trying to watch is either unavailable or has not started
But it's not just cosmetic changes that need made to the crumbling walls of the UK's main royal palace.
The plumbing is likely to need upgrading to make it energy efficient so modern standards.
There are also issues surrounding the wiring which will doubtless need refurbishment after so long and, perhaps most alarmingly, there are reportedly significant amounts of harmful asbestos to be removed by specialist workmen.
BBC
Cracking building: But the much-loved palace's refurbishment could mean the Queen has to move out until it's completed
A royal source said : "One option is for the palace to be vacated, we're getting experts to look at these scenarios and cost them for us."
The history of the building is not in question, but there's also a new generation of royals spending time in the building, which is the Queen's official royal residence in London.
Click to play
The Live Event you are trying to watch is either unavailable or has not started
It's also a massive draw for tourists since it opened the state rooms to the public in 1993 throughout August and September when the Queen is away.
Although the last time the Queen left for any length of time was during World War II - when she moved to Windsor Castle with Princess Margaret - the maintenance plan is so vast that it may require her to vacate the mansion again.
BBC
Under strain: Issues have required workmen to attend to the building with respiratory gear because of asbestos
Buckingham Palace, a working palace used for state occasions and meetings with the Prime Minister when required, has 775 rooms.
These include 19 state rooms, 52 royal and guest bedrooms, 188 staff bedrooms, 92 offices and 78 bathrooms.
The release of the Royal finances has shown that property maintenance dipped from £13.3 million last year to £11.7 million this year - with a surplus of £2.2 million transferred to reserves to help meet the future cost of re-servicing Buckingham Palace.