 
 
Buckingham Palace comprises of 775 rooms. These include 19 State rooms, 240 bedrooms, in which 52 Royal and guest bedrooms, 188 staff bedrooms, 92 offices rooms and 78 bathrooms.  The building is 108 metres in length at front, depth is 120 meters (including the central quadrangle) and 24 metres high. The building which form the core of today house was originally build for the  Duke of Buckingham in 1705. The site was a private ownership for more than 150 years, it was occupied by  George III in 1761 as residence for Queen Charlotte and known as the Queens house. In the 19th century the Palace was reconstructed mainly by architects John Nash and Edward Blore ,theybuild another three wing around central core building. Buckingham Palace became the official royal residence  of the British monarch on the accession of Queen Victoria in 1837. The last major additions in Palace structure were made in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the East front, which consist of  the well-known balcony from which the royal family traditionally  greet crowds outside. Once,in World war II  the palace chapel was destroyed by a German bomb, the Queen’s Gallery was built there and opened to the public in 1962 to exhibition of art from the Royal Collection.
 
 
 
The Main rooms of the palace are contained on the piano nobile behind the west-facing garden façade at the back of the palace. The centre of the state rooms is the Music Room, its large convey the feature of the façade. Border of the Music Room are in Blue and the White Drawing Rooms. At the centre of the suite, there is link to all the state rooms.  The Gallery is full with numerous works including some by Rembrandt,Vermeer and van Dyck, Rubens  , other rooms linked from the Picture Gallery are the Throne Room and the Green Drawing Room. The Green Drawing Room serves as a big corridor to the Throne Room, and serve as the ceremonial route to the throne from the Guard Room at the top of the Grand Staircase. The Guard Room have white marble statues of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert, in Roman costume. These rooms are used only for ceremonial and official entertaining, but they are open for the public every summer. Beneath the State apartments there lies a group of slightly less grand rooms called as semi-state apartments.
 
 
 
These rooms are linked with the Marble room and serve as less formal work and private meetings. Some of these rooms are named and decorated after the visit of some famous person like room no-1844 which was decorated in that year for state visit of Emperor Nicholas I of Russia and Room no-1855 for visit of Emperor  Napoleon III of France .  The blue and red Chinese Luncheon Room is constructed from parts of the Brighton Banqueting and Music Rooms, but its chimney piece was designed by W.M. Feetham. The wallpaper of Yellow Drawing Room  was supplied in 1817 for the Brighton Saloon, and the chimney piece of this room has European concept , consist with designing in the for of dragons, designed by Robert Jones. In this wing a famous balcony stood at the centre, with the Centre Room behind its glass doors. This is a Chinese-style saloon commissioned  by Queen Mary, she work with the designer Sir Charles Allom, created a more “beautiful” Chinese theme in the late 1920s, and the lacquer doors were brought from Brighton in 1873.At each end of gallery  the Chinese Luncheon Room and Yellow Drawing Room are located , with the Centre Room  placed at the centre.
At the back end of the palace there is a large garden with its lake, it is the largest private garden in London. The Queen host her annual garden parties each summer and also some big parties at royal milestone like jubilee. The garden is 40 acres in area including a helicopter landing area , a lake, a tennis court. Every year  50,000 invited guests are hosted at the garden parties,receptions and other events. The Forecourt of palace is used for changing of guard and it is a major ceremony and tourist attraction. The Buckingham Palace is the symbol of British monarchy and a major tourist attraction in Britain.