The Queen's house : a social history of Buckingham Palace /
Main Author:	Healey, Edna.
Format:	Book
Language:	English
Published:	Carroll & Graf, 1998
Edition:	First Carroll and Graf edition.
Subjects:	
Buckingham Palace (London, England) > History.
Great Britain > Kings and rulers > Dwellings.
Great Britain > Court and courtiers.
SUMMARY
A lively, intimate portrait of the people, from sovereigns to governesses, who have lived in Buckingham Palace, the palace that defines the modern monarchy. Meticulously chronicled.--Times Literary Supplement. of photos.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgements	p. vii
List of Illustrations	p. ix
Prologue	p. xiii
Chapter 1	The Duke of Buckingham	p. 1
Chapter 2	George III and Queen Charlotte	p. 28
Chapter 3	George IV	p. 82
Chapter 4	William IV	p. 100
Chapter 5	Queen Victoria	p. 116
Chapter 6	Edward VII	p. 190
Chapter 7	King George V and Queen Mary	p. 208
Chapter 8	King Edward VIII	p. 264
Chapter 9	King George VI and Queen Elizabeth	p. 281
Chapter 10	Queen Elizabeth II	p. 338
Notes	p. 395
Sources and Select Bibliography	p. 415
Index	p. 421
Review by Booklist Review
Welcome to Chez Windsor! Popular historian Healey invites readers to follow Buckingham Palace's history as a splendid setting for royal occasions as well as a private home to generations of the royal family. George III was the first king to take up residence in the London mansion known then as Buckingham House; since 1837 it has been the British monarch's official London residence. Under George IV--or, more specifically, under George IV's architect, John Nash--Buckingham Palace was reoutfitted into the grand pile we see today. Queen Victoria enjoyed the luxury of her London home, and Prince Albert reformed household operations; but upon his death she rarely came to the capital to occupy her rooms in the palace. For the kings and queens succeeding her, however, Buckingham Palace once again took its place as both home and symbol. The book, prepared with the cooperation of the queen, the Queen Mother, Princess Margaret, and various members of the royal household, will definitely hold the interest of European history buffs. --Brad Hooper
From Booklist, Copyright (c) American Library Association. Used with permission.
Review by Publisher's Weekly Review
The mansion the Duke of Buckingham built overlooking St. James's Park was so elegant that King George II tried to buy it‘he couldn't afford the asking price. But the Buckinghams fell on hard times, so, in 1761, George II's grandson, George III, bought it for £28,000. That is the real beginning of this entertainingly gossipy look at Buckingham Palace and its royal inhabitants that Healey (Lady Unknown) has researched in the Royal Archives and in interviews with many members of the present queen's household. The house was transformed by John Nash under George IV into an extravagant palace for his rich furnishings and art, but his successor, William IV, so hated the huge pile that he tried to give it away to Parliament. Healey gives a lively description of succeeding changes in monarchs, entertainments, ceremony, architecture and amenities from Victoria (who introduced water closets) to Elizabeth II (who has lived in the palace since she was 10). Healey reserves her greatest admiration for George VI and Queen Mum and their decision to remain in the palace throughout WWII, despite the heavy damage caused by Nazi air raids. In her final chapter, Healy abandons a witty pungent style for a more defensive, sycophantic tone praising Elizabeth II's thrifty ways, devotion to duty and warm, open manner. Perhaps Princess Di's partisans will resent the cozy portrayal, but others will delight in this well-written chronicle of the house of the House of Windsor. 8 pages b&w and 16 pages color photos not seen by PW. (Sept.) (c) Copyright PWxyz, LLC. All rights reserved
(c) Copyright PWxyz, LLC. All rights reserved
Review by Library Journal Review
Healey, wife of former cabinet minister Lord Healey, has written an informative and entertaining history of Buckingham Palace. The palace has been home to British monarchs since George III bought Buckingham House in 1761 for £28,000. He gave it to his young bride, Charlotte, and throughout his lifetime it was known as the Queen's House. Healey does a fine job of detailing the building's transformation into a palace, but those looking for scandal won't find it‘Healey is interested in art, architecture, and history, and her stories of the royal family, while fascinating, relate strictly to her subject. Andrew Morton's Inside Buckingham Palace (Summit Bks., 1991), in contrast, deals with the people inside the palace and not the palace itself. Libraries that own Compton Mackenzie's The Queen's House (1953) will want to purchase Healey's more thorough work. Recommended for academic and public libraries.‘Elizabeth Mary Mellett, Brookline P.L., MA (c) Copyright 2010. Library Journals LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Media Source, Inc. No redistribution permitted.
(c) Copyright Library Journals LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Media Source, Inc. No redistribution permitted.
AUTHOR NOTES
Edna Healey, the wife of former Cabinet Minister Lord Healey, lives in Sussex, England.