Buckingham Palace
Stats
Buckingham Palace, The Mall, London, SW1A 1AA, United Kingdom
Featured in Die Another Day (2002)
Profile
Buckingham Palace is mentioned briefly at the end of Moonraker when a NASA technician tells an observing M and Sir Frederick Gray that the video feed they are about to see is also being patched through to the palace.
No doubt Her Majesty finds out more that what she bargained for when she sees a weightless Bond and Dr Holly Goodhead weightless under the sheets.
It is not until 23 years later that Buckingham Palace is actually seen in Die Another Day.
After Bond finds out an involvement between Zao and Gustav Graves, he travels to London to investigate.
He notices Graves making a showy entrance by parachuting out of a plane, landing smoothly in front of the palace to an impressed group of reporters.
Graves and Miranda Frost then get into two Range Rovers and drive off.
About
Buckingham Palace is the official London residence and office of the British monarch since 1837.
The palace originally evolved from a town house built in 1705 for the Duke of Buckingham.
During the 19th century the house was enlarged to create three large wings around a central courtyard.
The East front, the most recognisable part of the palace with famous balcony, was added in the late 19th century, and was later remodelled in the early 20th century.
The palace has 775 rooms, including 19 State rooms, 52 Royal and guest bedrooms, 188 staff bedrooms, 92 offices and 78 bathrooms.
The rear of the palace contains a park-like garden, containing a lake, helicopter pad and tennis courts, and is reported to be the largest private garden in London.
However, the garden is often open to select members of the public during annual garden parties, and especially during royal milestones, such as the Golden and Diamond Jubilees.
When The Queen is in residence, the Royal Standard is flown from the mast at the top of the palace, otherwise the Union Jack is flown instead.
As well as being the residence and office of the monarch, the palace also acts a place to hold state visits, royal hospitality and as a focus for national celebrations.
On such occasions it is customary for members of the Royal Family to come out onto the balcony at the front of the palace, usually to a warm welcome of thousands of people gathered below.
Trivia
As Graves approaches the palace, all the reporters are actually gathered in front of the Canada Gate at the entrance to Green Park.
These gates are usually locked, but were opened especially for the film, allowing Graves to walk through them and get into the two Range Rovers with Miranda Frost.
The Changing of the Guard takes place between 11:15am and 12pm.
There is no Changing of the Guard in very wet weather.
During the autumn and winter, Changing of the Guard takes place on alternate dates, but it is held daily during spring and summer.
The nearest tube stations are Green Park, Hyde Park Corner, St. James' Park and Victoria.