Big Ben Actually it is the name of the bell in the clock tower of the Palace of Westminster - the Houses of Parliament today. It is the symbol of London. The clock tower´s official name is Saint Stephen´s tower. It is 96 m high. It was constructed between 1843 and 1858.
HMS Belfast The Royal Navy cruiser, constructed in 1936-1939, since 1971 a floating maritime museum.
Tower Bridge This bridge is one of London´s most famous symbols. The structure in Victorian Gothic style was completed in 1894. It is 265 m long.It can be opened for boat traffic. The mechanism to open the bridge is hidden in the two towers. It used to open almost 50 times a day, but nowadays it is only rised about 1,000 times a year.
Millennium Bridge This Footbridge over the Thames was opened in June 2000 and was a part of city´s millennium celebration. It is 325 m long and 4m wide. It can hold 5,000 pedestrians at any given time. At its northern end is the St Paul´s Cathedral and at the southern end the new Globe Theatre and the Tate Modern Museum.
London Eye This observation wheel is a very popular tourist attraction in London. The 135 m tall structure was built as a part of London´s millennium celebrations. The construction took more than a year. The diameter is 122m. A turn takes 30 minutes.
Beefeaters They guard the Tower. They lock the gates every night. They wear blue or red uniforms.
The Tower of London This fortress was built at the end of the 11th century by William the Conqueror. There are many towers and buildings there. For a long time it was a prison. There is a museum now.
The White Tower It is in the middle of the Tower of London. It has the flag of the United Kingdom on the top.
double-decker How is this bus called?
Picadilly Circus It is a busy round place at the junction of five major streets: Regent Street; Shaftesbury Avenue, Picadilly and Covent Garden.There are shopping and entertainment areas in the near: Soho, Chinatown, Leicester Square and Trafalgar Square. The name of this place originates from a 17th century frilled collar.
Trafalgar Square The largest square in London, central meeting place since Middle Ages. At the center of the square there is the tall Nelson´s Column which was built to commemorate the victory of Admiral Lord Nelson over the French fleet in 1805. During that battle Nelson was wounded and he died.
Buckingham Palace It was originally a countryhouse of duke of Buckingham, John Sheffield. Since 1837 it is the residence of the Royal family.The palace has about 600 rooms. Some of these rooms can be visited when the Royal family is not there. Each time when the Queen is in the Palace a flag is hoisted.
Harrods It is London´s most famous luxurious department store. It´s assortiment is enormous. Harrods used to be known as a store where anything you could think of was for sale.
St James Park It is the oldest Royal Park. It was acquired by Henry VIII. The park was used as a Royal Zoo. The park has more than 5,5 million visitors per year. The park´s lake is home to 15 different species of birds.
Houses of Parliament It is also known as the Palace of Westminster - the seat of the House of Lords and the House of Commons (government). In the Middle Ages the kings lived there.
Westminster Abbey This building in the gothic style is a burial ground for numerous politicians, sovereigns and artists. The royal coronatons take place there since 1066. Originally it was a Norman monastery. Most of the present building dates from 1245 to 1272. The youngest part was completed in the 19th century.
The Jewel House It is the middle part of the Tower of London. The beautiful crown jewels are kept there.
Millennium Dome . It was built on the Meridian Line in Greenwich to celebrate the start of the new Millennium. In 2005 this building was renamed O2 Arena after the mobile phone company. It is now a multifunctional sports and entertainment complex. It houses a number of buildings and is used for many different events, including concerts. It will be used during the 2010 Olympics as the venue for gumnastics, baskteball finals and handball finals
Kew Gardens It is the name of the Royal Botanic Gardens in west London. It´s area is 132 ha. It boasts a collection of about 50, 000 different plant species as well as many impressive buildings such as the Palm House and the 10 story Pagoda.
The British Museum It is the largest museum in Great Britain, established in 1753. It´s collection consist more than 7 million objects of art and antiquities that are displayed in over 90 rooms.