SEP
APR
May
18
2015
2016
2017
6 captures
1 Jul 14 - 18 Apr 16
Close Help
Architecture.com Menu
Awards
Regional Awards 2016
RIBA Stirling Prize 2015
RIBA National Award Winners 2015
Royal Gold Medal 2016
RIBA House of the Year 2015
Stephen Lawrence Prize 2015
RIBA Client of the Year 2015
Explore
Architecture
Inspirational architects
Architectural Styles
Buildings around the world
Locations
Discover the Library's collections
RIBA Role Models
Find an
Architect
What's
on
Professional Events
Cultural Events
Talks
Exhibitions
Lectures
Join &
Support
Join the RIBA
Member log in
RIBA Friends of Architecture
Individual giving
Corporate partnerships
RIBA
The RIBA Library
Our UK offices
Professional support
Becoming an architect
CPD
Member login
Riba Venues
About us
Contact us
More
Services
RIBAproductselector.com
RIBACPD.com
RIBA Appointments
RIBA Journal
RIBA Bookshops
RIBApix
FOR Members, STUDENTS & Professionals
Buckingham Palace
Architect
Edward Blore, John Nash, Aston Webb and William Winde
Type
Government and democracy
Collections
Discover the Library's collections TOP BRITISH BUILDINGS
Built
1912
Location
London
The work of several architect over several generations, Buckingham Palace began life in the early 18th century as Buckingham House when it was originally built for the Duke of Buckingham.
Buckingham House, designed by William Winde, had a central block with two smaller wings on either side; the building was lavishly and controversially remodelled by John Nash for King George IV.
It became the main residence of British monarch after Queen Victoria took residence in 1837, from then on reorganisation of the palace was followed by the building of a new wing designed by Edward Blore.
Completed in 1850, the extension was to provide the space needed for the queen's growing family and the royal court of an expanding empire.
But today it's not Blore's design the public sees from The Mall.
After Paris had been transformed by Haussmann in the 19th century, writers were often lamenting at how poor London looked in comparison.
With the influence of Beaux-Arts planning, there was a desire to improve and beautify London into a city suitable for the spectacle and governance of an empire.
At the beginning of the 20th century grand new routes such as The Mall, Aldwych and Kingsway changed the way people moved around the capital and how London was perceived by visitors.
Appearing in the  Edwardian architectural press were discussions about the design for a new public façade for Buckingham Palace which would create a suitable setting for the new Victoria Monument and starting point to the processional route The Mall.
Most visibly, it would replace Edward Blore’s much-criticised addition to the front of Nash’s quadrangle.
Sir Aston Webb’s design is well conceived.
Considering all things
Sir Aston Webb in 1904.
© RIBA Library Drawings and Archives Collections
When the Building News and Engineering Journal  reported on the proposals, on view in the House of Lords, by Sir Aston Webb to reface the east side of Buckingham Palace, it commented that: “Sir Aston Webb’s design is well conceived.
Considering all things” (1).
His design, limited by the fact he couldn’t alter the interiors and had to follow the existing line of windows, showed the influence of Wren and the Renaissance.
As a successful architect and part of the architectural establishment, throughout his long career Webb was able to adapt to changing fashions.
Classical architecture had supplanted Gothic and the bric-a-brac of styles of Victorian times, and its triumph in the Edwardian era could be read in  articles published at the time promoting it, for example, as the suitable style for the new capital of India, New Delhi – with or without the addition of indigenous motifs (2).
Typical of the British tradition of compromise, the Builder notes that the dream to rebuild the palace as the empire’s royal residence was impossible due to the nation’s finances, suggesting Webb’s scheme was the best in the circumstance (3) .
The scheme would at least remove the crumbling work of Blore at a fraction of the cost of a completely new palace.
There seemed to general agreement that Webb was the ideal person to take on this job.
By this time he had won a  Royal Gold Medal  (1905) and been president of the RIBA.
With Ingress Bell, he also headed a large firm of architects.
These alone were not the only reasons why he was chosen.
Webb had already provided the designs for the nearby Victoria Memorial, The Mall and Admiralty Arch.
Both King George V and the committee for the Victoria Memorial were unanimous in approving Webb’s design for Buckingham Palace.
The cost was estimated at £60,000.
In 1913 the work to create a new 300 ft façade of durable Portland Stone was complete.
In the process, Webb was one of the few architects to be able to design an entire urban setting and route in London – an architectural feat that even Sir Christopher Wren failed to achieve – and in doing so he influenced how the Royal Family were to be seen by their subjects in the future (4).
References  (available from the  British Architectural Library , RIBA )
Building News and Engineering Journal,  25 October 1912, vol.103, p.565
Architects’ & Builders’ Journal,  9 October 1912, vol.36, pp.375-379
Builder,  1 Nov 1912, vol.103, p.498
Fellows, R., 1995.
Edwardian architecture: style and technology .
London: Lund Humphries, p.35
Article by Wilson Yau, British Architectural Library, RIBA
YOU MIGHT ALSO BE INTERESTED IN
Aston Webb
Webb has been named as 'the most distinguished architect of his generation'.
He won the prestigious Royal Gold Medal in 1905.
Albert Memorial
A lavish memorial commissioned by the grief-stricken Queen Victoria and dedicated to the memory of her beloved husband Prince Albert.
RIBA Library
Riba Venues
Become an architect
Press office
Join RIBA
What we do
The Royal Institute of British Architects champions better buildings, communities and the environment through architecture and our members.
We provide the standards, training, support and recognition that put our members - in the UK and overseas - at the peak of their profession.
About RIBA
Visit us
About us
Contact us
Our press office
Work for us
Our UK offices
Support RIBA
Support architectural excellence
Leave a legacy
Individual giving
Corporate partnerships
RIBA Bookshops
Cafe & Restaurant
Keep up to date
Twitter
facebook
youtube
Linkedin
Instagram
66 Portland Place, London, W1B 1AD • +44 (0)20 7580 5533 • info@riba.org
Registered Charity No. 210 566.
Incorporated by Royal Charter No.
RC000484
Search architecture.com just start typing and hit enter again
×