Mar
APR
May
18
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
18 Apr 16 - 18 Apr 16
Close Help

Quizlet
   Create a Study Set
Log In
 Log In with Google
 Log In with Facebook
or
Keep me logged in
Forgot password?
Log In
Forgot password?
Sign Up  Google Sign In
Give us Feedback
If you're having trouble, want to report a bug, provide a suggestion, or just want to say hello — please fill out the form below.
What is your email?
What is 1 + 3?
Send Message
5. ja 6.klass: Sights of London
20 terms by Inkang
Study
Study  only
 Flashcards  Flashcards
 Learn  Learn
 Speller  Speller
 Test  Test
Play
Play  only
 Scatter  Scatter
Play
Play  only
 Scatter  Scatter
 Gravity  Gravity
Log in to add this set to a folder.
Log in to add this set to a class.
Share this set

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter
Share on Google Classroom
Send Email
Short URL

Like this study set? Create a free account to save it.
Create a free account
Sign up for an account
 Sign up with Google
 Sign up with Facebook
Sign up with Email
Already have a Quizlet account? Log in .
Create an account
Birthday
Why do you need my birthday?
Quizlet is open to all ages but requires all users to provide their real date of birth to comply with U.S. law.
You must enter a birthday.

Username
Do not use your real name!

Parent's email Email

Password

Retype Password

Are you a teacher?
Yes
No
You must say if you are a teacher.

 
I agree to the Terms of Service
You must agree to the Terms of Service.
 
Sign Up
List
Scores
Info
Advertisement Upgrade to remove ads
Grade 5 and 6
Original Alphabetical
Study all 20 terms Study 0 termterms only
  
Big Ben
Actually it is the name of the bell in the clock tower of the Palace of Westminster - the Houses of Parliament today. It is the symbol of London. The clock tower´s official name is Saint Stephen´s tower. It is 96 m high. It was constructed between 1843 and 1858.
  
HMS Belfast
The Royal Navy cruiser, constructed in 1936-1939, since 1971 a floating maritime museum.
  
Tower Bridge
This bridge is one of London´s most famous symbols. The structure in Victorian Gothic style was completed in 1894. It is 265 m long.It can be opened for boat traffic. The mechanism to open the bridge is hidden in the two towers. It used to open almost 50 times a day, but nowadays it is only rised about 1,000 times a year.
  
Millennium Bridge
This Footbridge over the Thames was opened in June 2000 and was a part of city´s millennium celebration. It is 325 m long and 4m wide. It can hold 5,000 pedestrians at any given time. At its northern end is the St Paul´s Cathedral and at the southern end the new Globe Theatre and the Tate Modern Museum.
  
London Eye
This observation wheel is a very popular tourist attraction in London. The 135 m tall structure was built as a part of London´s millennium celebrations. The construction took more than a year. The diameter is 122m. A turn takes 30 minutes.
•
  
Beefeaters
They guard the Tower. They lock the gates every night. They wear blue or red uniforms.
  
The Tower of London
This fortress was built at the end of the 11th century by William the Conqueror. There are many towers and buildings there. For a long time it was a prison. There is a museum now.
  
The White Tower
It is in the middle of the Tower of London. It has the flag of the United Kingdom on the top.
  
double-decker
How is this bus called?
  
Picadilly Circus
It is a busy round place at the junction of five major streets: Regent Street; Shaftesbury Avenue, Picadilly and Covent Garden.There are shopping and entertainment areas in the near: Soho, Chinatown, Leicester Square and Trafalgar Square. The name of this place originates from a 17th century frilled collar.
  
Trafalgar Square
The largest square in London, central meeting place since Middle Ages. At the center of the square there is the tall Nelson´s Column which was built to commemorate the victory of Admiral Lord Nelson over the French fleet in 1805. During that battle Nelson was wounded and he died.
  
Buckingham Palace
It was originally a countryhouse of duke of Buckingham, John Sheffield. Since 1837 it is the residence of the Royal family.The palace has about 600 rooms. Some of these rooms can be visited when the Royal family is not there. Each time when the Queen is in the Palace a flag is hoisted.
  
Harrods
It is London´s most famous luxurious department store. It´s assortiment is enormous. Harrods used to be known as a store where anything you could think of was for sale.
  
St James Park
It is the oldest Royal Park. It was acquired by Henry VIII. The park was used as a Royal Zoo. The park has more than 5,5 million visitors per year. The park´s lake is home to 15 different species of birds.
  
Houses of Parliament
It is also known as the Palace of Westminster - the seat of the House of Lords and the House of Commons (government). In the Middle Ages the kings lived there.
  
Westminster Abbey
This building in the gothic style is a burial ground for numerous politicians, sovereigns and artists. The royal coronatons take place there since 1066. Originally it was a Norman monastery. Most of the present building dates from 1245 to 1272. The youngest part was completed in the 19th century.
  
The Jewel House
It is the middle part of the Tower of London. The beautiful crown jewels are kept there.
  
Millennium Dome .
It was built on the Meridian Line in Greenwich to celebrate the start of the new Millennium. In 2005 this building was renamed O2 Arena after the mobile phone company. It is now a multifunctional sports and entertainment complex. It houses a number of buildings and is used for many different events, including concerts. It will be used during the 2010 Olympics as the venue for gumnastics, baskteball finals and handball finals
  
Kew Gardens
It is the name of the Royal Botanic Gardens in west London. It´s area is 132 ha. It boasts a collection of about 50, 000 different plant species as well as many impressive buildings such as the Palm House and the 10 story Pagoda.
  
The British Museum
It is the largest museum in Great Britain, established in 1753. It´s collection consist more than 7 million objects of art and antiquities that are displayed in over 90 rooms.
Flickr Creative Commons Images
Some images used in this set are licensed under the Creative Commons through Flickr.com . Click to see the original works with their full license.
“Big Ben” image
“HMS Belfast” image
“Tower Bridge” image
“Millennium Bridge” image
“London Eye” image
“The Tower of London” image
“The White Tower” image
“double-decker” image
“Picadilly Circus” image
“Trafalgar Square” image
“Buckingham Palace” image
“Harrods” image
“St James Park” image
“Houses of Parliament” image
“Westminster Abbey” image
“The Jewel House” image
“Millennium Dome .” image
“Kew Gardens” image
“The British Museum” image
Please allow access to your computer’s microphone to use Voice Recording.
Having trouble? Click here for help.


We can’t access your microphone!
Click the icon above to update your browser permissions above and try again
Example:
Reload the page to try again!
Reload
Press Cmd-0 to reset your zoom
Press Ctrl-0 to reset your zoom
It looks like your browser might be zoomed in or out. Your browser needs to be zoomed to a normal size to record audio.
Please upgrade Flash or install Chrome
to use Voice Recording.
For more help, see our troubleshooting page .
Your microphone is muted
For help fixing this issue, see this FAQ .
Star this term
You can study starred terms together

NEW! Voice Recording


Using Quizlet
Sign Up
Help
Mobile
Students
Teachers
About Quizlet
Company
Press
Jobs
Privacy
Terms
Contact
Study Everywhere! © 2016 Quizlet Inc. Follow @quizlet on Twitter.
 Create Study Set
 Log In with Google
 Log In with Facebook
or
Keep me logged in
Forgot password?
Log In
Forgot password?
Need an account?
Sign up for free