OCT
MAR
JUL
15
2015
2016
2017
13 captures
12 Jul 11 - 31 Jul 16
Close Help
Federal Indian Law For Alaska Tribes
TM112 Course Materials
Skip to content
Home
Current Events
About
Unit 1
Doctrine of Discovery
Royal Proclamation of 1763
U.S. Constitution and Congress
Treaties
Marshall Trilogy (1823-1832)
Removal and Reservations
Crow Dog Case (1883)
Assimilation
Russians in Alaska and U.S. Purchase
Early Years in Alaska after Purchase
Unit 2
Early Education and Effects of the Nelson Act (1905)
Early Alaska Native Land Cases and Acts
Citizenship: United States, State of Alaska, Tribal
Indian Reorganization Act (1934)
Cohen’s Handbook of Federal Indian Law,  Case’s Alaska Natives and American Laws
World War II
Indian Country Statute (1948)
Termination Era 1950s, Public Law 280
Alaska Statehood and build up to Alaska Native Land Claims
Unit 3
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) 1971
Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (ISDEAA) 1975
Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) 1978
Subsistence (ANILCA 1980)
Unit 4
Federal Recognition of Alaska Tribes and Relations with the State of Alaska
Alaska Tribal Sovereignty and Jurisdiction: Major case law affecting Alaska tribal jurisdiction
Relationships between Alaska and Lower 48 Tribes
Modern Tribal Governments in Alaska
General Principles of Federal Indian Law
Blackboard (UAF)
Search for:
Crow Dog Case (1883)
Crow Dog, his rifle and horse
The Ex Parte Crow Dog case, heard by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1883, illustrates how federal Indian law works in several ways. The situation in the case is very interesting, and whole books have been written about it. In brief, the case involved a Brule Sioux man named Crow Dog, a traditionalist and a captain of the tribal police force. Crow Dog shot and killed a man called Spotted Tail who was viewed as an accommodator and great peace chief by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), but also known to have a bad temper. Spotted Tail was the uncle to the famous warrior Crazy Horse. There are various explanations of why Crow Dog killed Spotted Tail, but many mention issues over power struggles and a woman named Light in the Lodge. Both men were from the same Tribe and the killing took place on reservation land. The Tribe handled the case in its traditional way, and made Crow Dog pay restitution of $600, 8 horses, and one blanket which was a significant payment in those days, to take care of Spotted Tail’s family. The Territory of Dakota also heard the case, the first time in the history of the country that an Indian was held on trial for the murder of another Indian. The Dakota Court sentenced Crow Dog to hang for the murder.
Spotted Tail
The case was appealed to the United State Supreme Court which found that unless Congress authorized it, the government did not have jurisdiction over a crime committed by one Indian on a reservation against another, so Crow Dog was set free. This illustrated the inherent sovereignty that tribes possess, the authority of tribes to govern over anything and in any manner unless Congress expressly limits or prohibits it. It also illustrates the way federal Indian law works in that if Congress is silent or unclear about a matter, the courts may make a decision that is law until Congress says otherwise.
Congress reacted to this ruling by passing the Major Crimes Act in 1885, placing 15 major crimes under federal jurisdiction if committed by one Indian against another on reservation land, Indian country. This illustrates the plenary power of Congress over Indian tribes. Congress would later pass an Act called Public Law 280 (1953) which passed the federal jurisdiction over crimes to certain states to enforce in Indian country. Alaska was included among those states upon statehood in 1959.
Activities
Watch the following video from the Tribal Nations DVD
If you are unable to view the YouTube video above, click here (link will open in a new browser or tab).
Additional Resources
The Major Crimes Act (PDF)
Crow Dog’s Case: American Indian Sovereignty, Tribal Law, and United States Law in the Nineteenth Century (Studies in North American Indian History) By Sidney L. Harring p. 107 Publisher: Cambridge University Press (February 25, 1994) Language: English ISBN 0-521-46715-2
Print This Page
Unit 1
Doctrine of Discovery
Royal Proclamation of 1763
U.S. Constitution and Congress
Treaties
Marshall Trilogy (1823-1832)
Removal and Reservations
Crow Dog Case (1883)
Assimilation
Russians in Alaska and U.S. Purchase
Early Years in Alaska after Purchase
Recent News Updates
BIA Providers Conference
ANCSA Presentation, Willie and Elizabeth Hensley
Older News Updates
Older News Updates
General Links
Interior-Aleutian Campus
Tribal Management Program
Tribal Management Program – UAF Catalog
University of Alaska Fairbanks
Contact
Lisa Jaeger, lisa.jaeger@tananachiefs.org
Kevin Illingworth, kmillingworth@alaska.edu
Information
Sources
Syllabus
How To Take This Course
Federal Indian Law For Alaska Tribes
This course was developed by the UAF Interior Aleutians Campus in cooperation with Tanana Chiefs Conference and the UAF Center for Distance Education . This project has been funded at least in part with Federal funds from the U.S. Department of Education Title III grant and by the U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs. The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the U.S. Department of Education or the U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs nor does mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.
[ LOGIN ]
Wordpress