MAY
APR
May
9
2014
2016
2017
2 captures
21 May 14 - 9 Apr 16
Close Help
Law School Case Briefs | Legal Outlines | Study Materials
This site offers a vast supply of easily copyable case briefs and case notes as well as legal outlines for law students, lawyers, and legal professionals.
Pages
Home
Help Support This Site: Please Donate Your Old Notes and Outlines!
How to Get A's In Law School
Recommended Law School Supplements
Thinking of Dropping Out of Law School?
Tuesday, May 20, 2014
Ex parte Crow Dog case brief summary
Ex parte Crow Dog,
 109 U.S. 556 (1883),
Synopsis: 
This was a case in which the Supreme Court  of the United States held that a federal court did not have jurisdiction  to try Crow Dog, a Native American (Indian) who killed another Indian  on the reservation when the offense had been tried by the tribal  council. In a conflict between two members of the same tribe, one killed  the other while on reservation land. The tribe handled it according to  Sioux tradition, and Crow Dog paid restitution. The United States  government then tried Crow Dog for murder, and he was sentenced to hang.
Appeal:
On his appeal to the Supreme Court, the court held that I x I crime was  exclusively within tribal jurisdiction, b/c it was specifically  exempted from the ICCA. Unless Congress authorized it, the courts had no  jurisdiction to try the case. 
Crow Dog  murdered Spotted Tail on Reservation. Crow Dog’s family pays  restitution, per tradition, to Spotted Tail’s family. Federal court  convicted Crow Dog of murder and SCOTUS reversed.
1.      Self-governance of Indians required.
2.      Indians can’t understand superior laws of US.
3.      Reaction: Major Crimes Act of 1885
a.      Regulated seven serious crimes under federal law
b.      US demands pushing law into “lawless” Indian Country
c.       First time US acts unilaterally with regard to Indians
Posted by
LawSchoolCaseBriefs.net at
8:13 AM
Email This BlogThis! Share to Twitter Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest
No comments:
Post a Comment
Newer Post Older Post Home
Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom)
Search Thousands of Case Briefs and Articles.
ShareThis
.
I have often tried to make the cases available as links in case you are a student without a textbook.
All the information on this site is constantly updated and edited.  Furthermore, if you have any outlines you want to share, so that others, free of charge, may benefit, please send those to be posted here.  Likewise, if you have case briefs you would like to share, please send them to [email protected]
.
Please keep in mind that this site makes no warranties as to the accuracy of the cases listed here or the current status of law.  These cases are derived from class notes and laws change over time.  If you have any questions about these materials, or any other legal questions, you should consult an attorney who is a member of the bar of the state you reside in.
Total Pageviews
© 2012 - 2014 lawschoolcasebriefs.net. Powered by Blogger .