SEP
APR
AUG
9
2013
2016
2017
13 captures
30 Aug 08 - 27 Aug 16
Close Help
Other Free Encyclopedias » Law Library - American Law and Legal Information » Notable Trials and Court Cases - 1883 to 1917
Ex Parte Crow Dog - Significance, An Orderly Government, Impact, The Indian Civil Rights Act
Tweet
court united samuel american
Petitioner
Crow Dog of the Sioux Indian Nation
Respondent
United States
Petitioner's Claim
That the U.S. court system does not have jurisdiction over crimes committed within the boundaries of an Indian reservation by one tribal member against another.
Chief Lawyer for Petitioner
A. J. Plowman
Chief Lawyer for Respondent
Samuel F. Phillips, U.S. Solicitor General
Justices for the Court
Samuel Blatchford, Joseph P. Bradley, Stephen Johnson Field, Horace Gray, John Marshall Harlan I, Stanley Matthews (writing for the Court), Samuel Freeman Miller, Morrison Remick Waite, William Burnham Woods
Justices Dissenting
None
Place
Washington, D.C.
Date of Decision
17 December 1883
Decision
Upheld Crow Dog's claim and overturned the lower court's decision sentencing him to death for a murder.
Related Cases
Worcester v. Georgia, 6 Pet.
(31 U.S.) 515 (1832).
United States v. Kagama, 118 U.S. 375 (1886).
Talton v. Mayes, 163 U.S. 376 (1896).
Williams v. Lee, 358 U.S. 217 (1959).
Oliphant v. Suquamish Indian Tribe, 435 U.S. 191 (1978).
Duro v. Reina, 495 U.S. 676 (1990).
Sources
Bacon, Donald C., et al., eds.
The Encyclopedia of the United States Congress.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995.
Further Readings
Harring, Sidney L. Crow Dog's Case: American Indian Sovereignty, Tribal Law, and United States Law in the Nineteenth Century.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Native American Rights Fund.
http://www.narf.org.
Wilkins, David E. American Indian Sovereignty and the U.S. Supreme Court: The Masking of Justice.
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1997.
Additional Topics
Ex Parte Crow Dog - Significance
The ruling established that U.S. courts did not have criminal jurisdiction in cases where one Native American murders another on reservation lands.
The Court ruled that tribes held exclusive jurisdiction over their own internal affairs, including murder cases.
The decision, however, prompted a swift congressional reaction.
Since 1885 Congress has exercised absolute (plenary) power over tribal juri…
Ex Parte Crow Dog - An Orderly Government
Crow Dog, whose Indian name was Kan-gi-Shun-ca, and Spotted Tail, also known as Sin-ta-ge-le-Scka, were members of the Brule Sioux Band of the Sioux Nation.
Crow Dog, at odds with Spotted Tail over several personal and public matters, shot and killed him in August of 1881.
Through application of traditional Sioux law, the families settled the matter by Crow Dog's family paying restitution to the v…
Ex Parte Crow Dog - Impact
The Crow Dog decision represented to many an extreme application of the doctrine of tribal sovereignty and self-government.
Stunned by the Court's finding, two years later Congress passed the Major Crimes Act of 1885.
The law essentially overturned the Crow Dog decision by identifying seven crimes on Indian lands over which federal courts would assume jurisdiction, including murder.
The act was im…
Ex Parte Crow Dog - The Indian Civil Rights Act
The Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 was enacted at a time when Native American groups were involved in bringing about a resurgence in Native American cultures and demanding that their civil rights be recognized.
North Carolina Senator Sam Ervin, Jr., received authorization from the Senate Judiciary Committee in 1961 to conduct hearings on the state of constitutional rights among Native Americans.
…
Floyd Allen Trial: 1912 - Virginia Tries Floyd Allen For Murder [next] [back] Dr. Mary Amanda Dixon Jones Trials: 1890  1892 - Able Doctor Or "difficult Woman"?
, The Manslaughter Case, The Libel Suit
Citing this material
Please include a link to this page if you have found this material useful for research or writing a related article.
Content on this website is from high-quality, licensed material originally published in print form.
You can always be sure you're reading unbiased, factual, and accurate information.
Highlight the text below, right-click, and select “copy”.
Paste the link into your website, email, or any other HTML document.
<a href="/web/20160409205746/http://law.jrank.org/pages/13671/Ex-Parte-Crow-Dog.html">Ex Parte Crow Dog - Significance, An Orderly Government, Impact, The Indian Civil Rights Act</a>
Tweet
User Comments
Name
Email
Your email address will be altered so spam harvesting bots can't read it easily.
Hide my email completely instead?
Body
Cancel or
about 5 years ago
what happen in the Duro vs. Reina case?
about 5 years ago
Marilyn Cross
After congress pass majors laws
Crow Dogs crimes included in the act?
over 8 years ago
This has been very useful, I am Dineh and im taking a Federal Indian Law class.
this  is very useful...
Copyright © 2016 Net Industries           and its Licensors – All Rights Reserved – Terms of Use