Mar
APR
May
9
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
9 Apr 16 - 9 Apr 16
Close Help
Skip to content
Working towards understanding and healing between Native American and non-Native peoples
Menu
Home
About
Capitol Art
Home Posts tagged 'Ex parte Crow Dog'
Ex parte Crow Dog
This Day in History: Supreme Court Cases Triggers Erosion of Tribal Court Powers
December 17, 2015
healingmn This Day in History Ex parte Crow Dog , Major Crimes Act of 1885
On this day in history, January 17, 1883, the U.S. Supreme Court issued its ruling in Ex Parte v. Crow Dog, a significant decision siding in favor of tribal court sovereignty.
It would eventually trigger congressional action to erode that power.
Here is the background , provided by Wikipedia.
In 1881, Crow Dog, a member of the Brulé band of the Lakota Sioux, shot and killed Spotted Tail, a Lakota chief.
Accounts differ on the details of the killing.
Regardless of the motives, the tribal council dealt with it according to tradition; Crow Dog paid restitution to the dead man’s family ($600, eight horses and a blanket).
Unsatisfied with that result, federal authorities assumed authority and prosecuted Crow Dog for murder in  Deadwood, South Dakota.
According to Wikipedia: the Deadwood Times reported that “it was the first time ‘in the history of the country, [that] an Indian is held for trial for the murder of another Indian.'”
Crow Dog was found guilty and sentenced to hang.
The case eventually ended up before the U.S. Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court held that unless authorized by Congress, federal courts had no jurisdiction to try cases where the offense had already been tried by the tribal council.
Crow Dog was therefore released.
Congress, unhappy with the result, passed the Major Crimes Act of 1885 .
That law places certain major crimes under federal jurisdiction even when committed by Native Americans against other Native Americans on reservation land.
According to Wikipedia, the law initially applied to seven major crimes, and the number now has grown to 15, including murder, manslaughter, burglary, robbery and felony child abuse and neglect.
Leave a comment
Follow Blog via Email
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Join 89 other followers
Search for:
Blog at WordPress.com.
| The Big Brother Theme .
Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com.
The Big Brother Theme .
Follow
Follow “”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 89 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com
Post to
Cancel