UK buying guides
Bristol buying guide
Whether it is a Tudor mansion on the outskirts of the city or a townhouse overlooking a Georgian square, Bristol has plenty of houses for sale.
By Property News team
October 29, 2015 13:30
With its pop-up bars in former toilets and outdoor galleries packed with street art, Bristol is the undisputed city of cool.
And if that's not enough, it's also the birthplace and original stomping ground of Banksy.
There is a lot going on in - and around - this west of England city, with plenty of festivals on the rural outskirts and a large shopping district in the centre.
With so much to offer, it is a popular place to live and attracts more and more Londoners looking to relocate for a slower pace.
It is home to a variety of architectural styles, with buildings from most eras represented throughout the city.
It means there are Tudor mansions as well as Georgian squares to choose from, depending on your budget.
You certainly have plenty of choice if you are looking for houses or flats for sale in Bristol .
Houses for sale in Bristol
Clifton
One of Bristol’s most prestigious areas is Clifton , which has Georgian and Victorian architecture in abundance.
It includes Royal York Crescent , which is reportedly Europe’s longest terrace.
As well as being a beautiful place to look at, Clifton is renowned for its community spirit, with plenty of shops and restaurants.
There is the Rockfish Grill and Seafood Market on Whiteladies Road, considered one of the city’s best fish restaurants, and the Avon Gorge Hotel, which has spectacular views of the Clifton Suspension Bridge.
City centre
Venture into the city centre and you’ll find the main commercial centre of the west of England.
There are all different types of shops, from the main high street chains to independent shops.
In particular, Gloucester Road is believed to have more independent shops than any other street in Britain.
Cabot Circus is a brand new shopping mall in the city centre.
Bristol Harbour
Transfer your attention to Bristol Harbour and you’ll find a huge array of tourist attractions, including museums, galleries, and nightclubs.
The ships that were once stationed at the original Port of Bristol have since been relocated seven miles downstream.
The area has been firmly transformed.
Many of the warehouses have been converted and the streets have a distinctly lively buzz about them.
The boats return each year during the summer for the Bristol Harbour Festival, which showcases tall ships, Royal Navy vessels and lifeboats.
Glastonbury
Take a ride outside of the centre and rural Somerset has some well-renowned attractions, with one of the best known being the music festival Glastonbury.
The five-day event is held near Pilton every year and includes live music, dance, comedy and theatre.
It began in the 1970s and was first attended by just 1,500 festival goers - a comparatively low figure to today’s 170,000 at the event.
Recent singers to have played at the festival include Kanye West, Lionel Richie and Paul Weller.
Things to do in Bristol
If you were asked to think of a landmark in Bristol, an image of Clifton Suspension Bridge would no doubt spring to mind.
The iconic bridge links Clifton to Leigh Woods in north Somerset and is a big tourist attraction.
Bristol also hosts an abundance of theatre and festivals throughout the year.
These include 10 days of alternative theatre at Mayfest and a celebration of theatre and comedy at the Bristol Improv Theatre Festival.
Jobs in Bristol
Bristol is one of the main commercial centres in Britain.
Many companies choose to set up their headquarters in the city - with some even relocating from the capital.
It covers a host of professions, from financial jobs at Lloyds TSB Group and independent financial advisers Hargreaves Lansdown to media organisations such as the BBC.
It is also a haven for aerospace, engineering and insurance.
And no discussion of companies in Bristol would be complete without a mention of Aardman Animations, which gave us the nation's most cherished Wallace & Gromit.
Universities
The University of Bristol is among the best in the world, latest research shows.
It is positioned 37, behind Oxford University and Kings College London, according to a list compiled by the QS World Universities rankings.
The University of the West of England - or UWE Bristol as it is known – was previously Bristol Polytechnic and is today the larger of the city’s two universities.
It has 27,000 students compared to 18,000 that attend Bristol University.
UWE’s largest and primary campus is Frenchay , which is four miles north of the city centre.
Transport in Bristol
Bristol to London by train and coach
Bristol may be on the other side of the country but it has direct transport links to London .
Trains to London Paddington from Bristol Temple Meads take around 1 hour 45 minutes depending on the time of day that you travel.
You may need to allow for an additional hour of travel time if you decide to go by coach, although it can be a lot cheaper with prices beginning at around £7.
London to Bristol by car
The distance from London to Bristol is around 120 miles, meaning it will take more than two hours if you’re travelling by car.
The journey will take you almost as the crow flies, along the M4.
In and around Bristol, traffic can be an issue and there are some hotspots that you may want to avoid.
These include the A4 Bath Road going out of the city towards Bath , where lanes merge into one opposite the entrance to the park and ride site.
Bristol airport
Bristol has its own airport, seven miles southwest of the city centre.
Airlines that operate out of the airport include Easyjet and Ryanair.
The airport announced the number of passengers topped the three quarters of a million mark for the first time in August 2015.
A total of 768,587 passengers passed through the terminal in August – up 6 per cent during the previous year.
Weather in Bristol
Being on the coast means Bristol can get quite cold, dipping to about five degrees lower than the temperature inland on the same day.
Perhaps the best time for consistent weather would be in the late spring or early summer.
Share this story