Clifton Suspension Bridge most loved roadside landmark in south of UK
By L_Churchill  |  Posted: February 17, 2016
Clifton Suspension Bridge most loved roadside landmark in south of UK
VIEW GALLERY
Clifton Suspension Bridge most loved roadside landmark in south of UK
X
Copy link to paste in your message
/
Clifton Suspension Bridge most loved roadside landmark in south of UK
Clifton Suspension Bridge most loved roadside landmark in south of UK
Clifton Suspension Bridge most loved roadside landmark in south of UK
Comments (0)
Its glorious structure and breath-taking views have been admired by commuters in Bristol for more than 150 years. But now the Clifton Suspension Bridge has been voted one of the UK's best-loved roadside landmarks.
Looking at its best on a clear day, Bristolians would think nothing quite beats the view of Brunel's most inspiring creation.
However, voters in a National Express survey did, as the famous bridge came in behind the Angel of the North on the A1 and Forth Bridge on the A90.
Coming in fourth was the nearby Severn Bridge on the M48.
Related content
The Victorian engineering masterpiece of the Clifton Suspension Bridge was the highest ranked landmark in the south of England.
National Express operates tens of thousands of journeys passing the world-famous bridge each year.
It surveyed 1,000 people asking them their favourite roadside landmark.
Steve Coates drives the 509 service between Swansea and London past the world-famous bridge daily.
He said: "Many people get really attached to roadside landmarks - they can be a marker your journey is well underway or lift your heart because you're nearly home.
"I love driving past the suspension bridge, particularly during sunrise or sunset when it's especially stunning and you often hear passengers remarking on it.
"It's just fantastic this city gateway has been voted one of Britain's best-loved landmarks."
Initial funding for the Clifton Suspension Bridge was given in 1754 by Bristol wine merchant William Vick, who left £1,000 towards the construction of a toll-free stone bridge.
Isambard Kingdom Brunel, aged 23, won a competition to design the bridge and was appointed as the project's engineer.
But the bridge was only completed five years after Brunel's death.
It weighs 1,500 tonnes, spans 702 feet, and sits 245 feet above the water.
The Severn Bridge was opened in 1966 to replace the ferry crossing from Aust to Beachley.
It has carried more than 300 million vehicles since it opened saw traffic flows rocket by 63 per cent between 1980 and 1990.
That led to a new Severn Crossing being built 5km downstream of the existing bridge.
Construction started in April 1992 and it was opened on June 5, 1996 by His Royal Highness, The Prince of Wales.
The top 10:
Angel of the North A1
Forth Bridge A90
Emley Moor transmitting station M1
Medway Viaduct M2