OCT
APR
May
16
2014
2016
2017
10 captures
2 Mar 12 - 16 Apr 16
Close Help
Cookies and networkrail.co.uk. We use cookies to give you the best         experience on our website. If you continue, we'll assume that you are happy to receive         them.
You can read more about how we use cookies, and turn them off, on this page .
Contact us
About us
News
Publications
Investor relations
Press
Virtual Archive
Social media
Home Archive home Explore Ask the archivist Blog About the archive
Explore
People
Isambard Kingdom Brunel
Isambard Kingdom Brunel  (1806–1859)
Did you know?
During the construction of the Mickleton Tunnel in the Cotswolds, a fierce argument took place between Brunel and his contractor. On 17 July 1851, Brunel arrived on site with a gang of several hundred navvies to take possession of the tunnel. The stand off was only diffused when Brunel was ‘read the Riot Act’ by local magistrates.
Civil and Mechanical Engineer
Isambard Kingdom Brunel is celebrated as an engineering genius. Brunel’s Great Western Railway was designed for speed and efficiency, and his daring schemes and record breaking structures are still a vital part of today’s railway infrastructure. He combined considerable ingenuity with immense boldness of vision in his sometimes controversial achievements.
Born on 9 April 1806 in Portsea near Portsmouth, Isambard Kingdom Brunel was the third child of Marc Brunel, a French émigré engineer and English mother Sophie Kingdom. After an education in both England and France, Brunel started an apprenticeship with his father on the construction on the Thames Tunnel in London. He quickly became resident engineer to the project work, and he was able to gain considerable experience of a large scale and innovative construction project as well as working knowledge of brickwork and cements that would stand him in good stead for his future engineering projects.
 
The Great Western Railway
Brunel’s work for a proposed bridge across the River Avon at Clifton introduced him to the Bristol Railway Committee. In 1833 they engaged him to survey a railway line between Bristol and London, and he presented his proposals to the Committee after only three months. It was an ambitious scheme with carefully planned gradients to make the route as level and straight as possible in order to promote high speed travel on the line. The Great Western Railway Act was approved by Parliament in 1835 and work on the 116 mile line started in 1836. The line proved considerably more problematic and expensive to construct than Brunel had originally estimated, not least because of the immense work involved in constructing Box Tunnel near Bath. Shareholders, particularly in Liverpool, were dissatisfied with Brunel and unsuccessfully attempted to remove him from office before the line was completed. His robust defence of the engineering on the line secured his position, but debate raged about his use of the broad gauge.
 
Engineering feats
Brunel’s railway from London to Bristol required pioneering civil engineering. The Wharncliffe Viaduct (1837) was the first major structure to be completed by Brunel, and the first to be completed on the line. In 1839 he persuaded the GWR to allow wires for the new electric telegraph system to be installed between Paddington and West Drayton, taking them over the viaduct. This was the first ever installation of a commercial electric telegraph. Unequalled anywhere in the world, the arches of the Maidenhead Bridge (1838) were at the time the flattest brick arches ever built. Box Tunnel (1840) was the largest work on the line and at the time of construction was the longest tunnel ever constructed. Designs for the Windsor Bridge (1849) for the Great Western Railway’s branch line and the Chepstow Bridge (1852) for the South Wales Railway developed Brunel’s thinking for the much larger ‘Royal Albert Bridge’ (1859) for the Cornwall Railway. Taking the line across the Tamar at Saltash, this bridge used both wrought iron tubular arches and suspension chains to support the rail deck, giving it its unique appearance.
 
Grand designs
Throughout his career Brunel worked on a wide variety of engineering projects, to varying degrees of success. He pioneered the use of the ‘atmospheric railway’, and used it on a line for the South Devon Railway between Exeter & Newton Abbot. Using stationary engines rather than locomotives, a pipe in the centre of the track moved the train along by vacuum. Plagued with difficulties from the start, the scheme was unsuccessful and quickly abandoned.
It was Brunel’s vision to link the cities of London and New York via Bristol by rail and sea that was to be his legacy. The Great Western Railway established the Great Western Steamship Company to promote the venture. Having engineered their line between London and Bristol, they appointed Brunel as its chief engineer. His first ship for the Company, the SS Great Western, was the largest steamship of its day. Built to Brunel’s precise specifications, it was big enough to carry the fuel needed to power the journey and established non-stop steam navigation across the Atlantic on its maiden voyage in 1838. His second ship for the company, the SS Great Britain was even bigger, and the first large ship to be built of iron. But it was the SS Great Eastern that was to be Brunel’s biggest ship building challenge. Designed on a massive scale her construction and eventual launch in 1858 were fraught with difficulties. A ship on this scale in the mid nineteenth century was not a commercial success, but was the forerunner of the cargo ships commonplace today.
Brunel’s health had been failing for some time before he had a stroke on board the SS Great Eastern. He was taken back to his home at 18 Duke Street, London where he died on 15 September 1859 at the age of fifty three. He was buried in the family vault at Kensal Green Cemetery, London. Memorials were quickly raised, including the words 'I K Brunel 1859' being added to the portals at each end of the Royal Albert Bridge at Saltash which opened just a few months before his death. This memorial can still be seen on the bridge today.
 
 
Timeline
Find Out More
1806
9 April: Isambard Kingdom Brunel is born Portsea, Portsmouth. He is the third child and only son of Marc Isambard Brunel and Sophia Kingdom.
 
1814
Between 1814 and 1820 Brunel is educated at schools in Chelsea and Hove.
 
1820
Brunel is sent to France to study, first at Caen College then the Lycée Henri IV in Paris.
 
1822
April: Brunel returns to London and starts work in his father’s drawing office.
 
1826
Brunel is appointed resident engineer to the Thames Tunnel engineering work, where he gains experience of working with bricks and cements.
 
1828
January: IK Brunel almost dies in an accident in the Thames Tunnel.
 
1833
Brunel surveys a railway line from London to Bristol for the Great Western Railway. He is appointed its chief engineer.
 
1835
31 August: The Great Western Railway Act is authorised. The Great Western Railway adopts Brunel’s recommendation of the 7ft 0 1/4 in (2140 mm) broad gauge rail.
 
1836
5 July: Brunel marries Mary Elizabeth Horsley.
 
1838
The first part of the Great Western Railway line, extending from London to Maidenhead is opened.
 
1841
30 June: the Great Western Railway London to Bristol main line is opened throughout.
 
1847
Between 1847 and 1848 Brunel experiments with the South Devon 'atmospheric railway'. It was not a success and quickly abandoned.
 
1850
Brunel becomes a Vice-President of the Institution of Civil Engineers
 
1859
Brunel’s Royal Albert Bridge across the River Tamar is opened.  15 September: Isambard Kingdom Brunel dies at his home aged 53 from a stroke. He is buried in the family vault at Kensal Green Cemetery, London.
 
Maidenhead Bridge | Bridges and Viaducts
At the time it was built, Isambard Kingdom Brunel’s railway bridge over the River Thames at Maidenhead boasted the flattest yet widest brick constructed arches in the world. 
Read more
 
Bristol Temple Meads Station | Stations
Built as the western terminus of the Great Western Railway’s main line from London to Bristol, Bristol Temple Meads station has undergone many changes as it outgrew Brunel’s original building and became the railway gateway to the West Country. 
Read more
 
Paddington Station, London | Stations
Paddington Station is the grand terminus for the Great Western Railway that Isambard Kingdom Brunel always intended. Its story reflects that of the railway throughout the 19th, 20th and into the 21st century.
Read more
 
Box Tunnel, Box, Wiltshire | Tunnels
At the time of opening, Brunel’s Box Tunnel was the longest railway tunnel ever built. Controversial from the start, its problematic construction delayed the completion of the Great Western Railway’s London to Bristol route until June 1841. Today it is one of Isambard Kingdom Brunel’s most celebrated structures. 
Read more
 
Great Western Railway | Companies
The Great Western Railway built the main line which still operates today between London and Bristol. In appointing Isambard Kingdom Brunel as its chief engineer, together they pushed the boundaries of railway engineering which can still be seen in today’s infrastructure.
Read more
 
Robert Stephenson                      (1803 - 1859) | People
Robert Stephenson built on the considerable achievements of his father, George. His forward thinking enabled the significant expansion of railways during the ‘railway mania’ of the mid nineteenth century. His expertise in both civil and mechanical engineering established the concept of the railway which developed in this country, and was then exported to the world. 
Read more
 
 
 
 
Comments & Suggestions (11)
Your comments and suggestions are welcomed. Please note that all submissions will be reviewed and will be dealt with in accordance with our terms and conditions of website use.  We reserve the right not to publish any comments or suggestions. Your [user name] will be displayed as provided and all personal information will be dealt with in accordance with the terms of our privacy policy.  Please ensure that you have read our terms and conditions of website use and our privacy policy in full prior to submitting any comments or suggestions.
 
 Why did you decide to index persons by given name and not surname? Currently there are so few records in the index,  that it does not present too much of a problem, but in the future!
Posted by Steven Hobbs, Friday, March 2, 2012.
 Brunel's Vision - One Single Ticket is a novel which has been turnned into radio drama. It was recently reviewed in the Bristol Times in a feature called 'My Brunel twist to a murder mystery' by editor Gerry Brooke. It is a swashbuckling Victorian adventure, packed with power, intrigue, love and betrayal. It has the twist of setting a fictional story in a factual surrounding; blending real people with those of invention. For more details www.rob-wallace.co.uk
Posted by Robert Wallace, Friday, June 21, 2013.
 Do you have any images of locomotives of I K Brunel?  Thanks
Posted by Danny Read, Tuesday, February 24, 2015.
 how many railways did Brunel invent and what are they called good timeline it helped with my homework project
Posted by william, Tuesday, April 1, 2014.
 very helpfull
Posted by joe, Friday, November 23, 2012.
I'm also wondering why you've chosen to index by given name rather than surname. Surely people are more likely to search by surname rather than first name?
Posted by Jane Anderssohn, Friday, March 23, 2012.
Hi Danny,  Thanks for your comment. Our Archive looks after drawings of structures on the operational railway so we don’t have anything for locomotives or portraits of Brunel.  The best place to look for images online is probably the Science and Society Picture Library (www.scienceandsociety.co.uk) which has all sorts of images from the National Railway Museum’s Collection. Thanks, Nicola - The Archive Team
Posted by Nicola - The Archive Team, Monday, March 16, 2015.
 your site was helpful
Posted by big S, Friday, October 9, 2015.
Caz of diz site i can do ma assignment thank you  "networkrail.co.uk"  XD
Posted by Thadeesha, Tuesday, April 2, 2013.
 Do you have any images of locomotives of I K Brunel?  Thanks
Posted by Danny Read, Tuesday, February 24, 2015.
 ccccccccccccccccccccccccccoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooollllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllllll!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
Posted by tom, Friday, November 23, 2012.
Add a comment
Name
 
Please enter your name
Email
 
Please enter a valid email address
Your comment (500 character limit)  
 
Please enter your comment
 
See also
William Henry Barlow
WH Barlow was a civil engineer known for his large scale engineering projects in the late nineteenth century. He was responsible for the magnificent train shed roof at St Pancras station, the largest in the world when constructed. In the wake of disaster he designed the new Tay Bridge, setting new standards for civil engineering. His investigations into steel and the engineering of girders led to the design of the Forth Bridge, one of the most impressive railway structures in the world.  Read more
Related Links
Network Rail Links
The Great Western
External Links
BBC Schools - IK Brunel
Brunel 200
The Life of IK Brunel (1870)
 
Thank You For Your Comments!
Your comment will be reviewed by a moderator and will be published in due time...
[ Close ]
© Network Rail
Contact us Site map Terms and conditions Privacy policy Links Accessibility