JUN
APR
JUN
7
2015
2016
2017
4 captures
4 Jun 15 - 26 Jun 16
Close Help
Skip to content
Castles of Great Britain
My record of the castles I have visited in Great Britain
Menu
Home
About
Pre-Conquest Castles
The Anarchy
The Normans
Home Brougham Castle, Cumbria…
Brougham Castle, Cumbria…
April 26, 2015
May 7, 2015
Jamie Titchener Cumbria Architecture , Brougham Castle , Cumbria , History , Medieval Castle , Norman Castle , Penrith
Brougham Castle was began by Robert de Vieuxpont in the early 13th Century. Located two miles southeast of Penrith, the castle is strategically located between the confluence of the rivers Lowther and Eamont, with sweeping views across the Eden Valley. Built on the site of a former Roman fort, the castle initially consisted of a stone keep and a bailey surrounded by a rampart with palisade
In 1264 the grandson of Robert de Vieuxpont, also called Robert, was decleared a traitor and Brougham Castle, along with the de Vieuxponts family’s other castles and estates were confiscated by the Crown.The estates and castles were eventually returned to the de Vieuxpont family.
In 1269 the castle at Brougham came into the ownership of the de Clifford family through the marriage of Roger de Clifford to Isabella de Vieuxpont. On Roger’s death in 1282, the castle passed to Robert de Clifford, 1st Baron de Clifford. In 1296 the Anglo-Scottish War broke out. Robert held the title of Lord of the Marches and was responsible for the defence of the English border against the Scots. It was against this backdrop the defences at Brougham Castle were improved, with the wooden defences being replaced in stone and a new gatehouse being added.
Such was the importance of Robert de Clifford and Brougham Castle as his caput, Edward I visited him at Brougham in 1300. Robert de Clifford would go on to die at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314 having served two kings as both Warden and Lord Warden of the Marches.
In 1322 Roger de Clifford, 2nd Baron de Clifford was executed for being a traitor having rebelled against the king. With this, the de Clifford’s estates were confiscated by Edward II. The de Cliffords estates were restored to the family in 1327 on the accession of Edward III to the throne, including the castle at Brougham.
During the early 1380s the castle at Brougham was improved, with domestic buildings being added. However, these hadn’t been completed for very long when in 1388 the castle was captured and sacked by the Scots. After this, Brougham Castle seems to have lost its status as the main administrative centre for the de Cliffords, with them preferring to spend their time at Skipton Castle in Yorkshire.
By 1592 Brougham Castle was in a state of disrepair. The castle was in the ownership of Sir George Clifford, 3rd Earl of Cumberland at this time. The earl spent most of his time in the south of England as he held the post of the Queens Champion during the reign of Elizabeth I.
During the early 17th Century the castle went through a brief phase of restoration. The restoration must have been to a good standard as James I was entertained at the castle in 1617. Brougham Castle was inherited in 1643 by Lady Anne Clifford, who was the last member of the Clifford family to live at the castle. During this period, the castles in the ownership of the Clifford family at Appleby, Brougham and Brough (as well as other) underwent a period of restoration, with Lady Anne spending time at each in turn for several months. Lady Anne died in 1676 at Brougham. After this the castle at Brougham fell into a ruinous state having passed into the ownership of the Lord of Thanet who decided to concentrate his resources  on maintaining nearby Appleby Castle. The castle passed into state ownership in the 1930s.
The site is now managed by English Heritage and is open to the general public.
Brougham Castle Keep and Gatehouse
Brougham Castle Ruins
Share this:
Twitter
Facebook
Google
Like this:
Like Loading...
Post navigation
← Pleshey Castle, Essex…
Chrishall Castle (Park Wood), Essex.. →
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
Recent Posts
Toot Hill, Hertfordshire…
Bodiam Castle, East Sussex…
Pevensey Castle, East Sussex…
Middleton Mount, Norfolk…
Hastings Castle, East Sussex…
Archives
January 2016
December 2015
November 2015
October 2015
September 2015
August 2015
July 2015
June 2015
May 2015
April 2015
March 2015
February 2015
January 2015
December 2014
Categories
Bedfordshire (1)
Cambridgeshire (8)
Cumbria (3)
East Sussex (5)
Essex (7)
Hertfordshire (5)
Isle of Wight (2)
Kent (1)
Miscellaneous (3)
Norfolk (10)
Suffolk (5)
Surrey (2)
Wales (1)
Yorkshire (5)
Follow Castles of Great Britain on WordPress.com
Tags
Anglo-Saxon Castle Anglo-Saxons Anstey Anstey Castle Architecture Baconsthorpe Baconsthorpe Castle Bishop Stortford Bishop Stortford Castle Brougham Castle Bungay Castle Burwell Burwell Castle Cambridgeshire Carisbrooke Castle Carlisle Carlisle Castle Carmarthenshire Castle Castle Acre Castle Castle Camps Castle Camps Castle Castles Chrishall Castle Chrishall Park Wood Clare Castle Clare Castle Country Park Clare Suffolk Claxton Claxton Castle Colchester Castle Cumberland Cumbria Earthwork Earthworks East Anglia East Sussex Essex Fortified Manor House Giant's Hill Great Yarmouth Hertfordshire History Huntingdon Huntingdon Castle Isle of Wight Medieval Castle Motte and Bailey Mount Bures Mount Bures Castle Newcastle Emlyn Castle Norfolk Norman Castle Penrith Penrith Castle Pleshey Pleshey Castle Rampton Rampton Castle Saffron Walden Suffolk Surrey The Anarchy The Normans The Plantagenets Therfield Therfield Castle The Romans Thetford Thetford Castle Walden Castle Wales Waytemore Castle Welsh Castle Yorkshire
Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com. | The Big Brother Theme .
Follow
Follow “Castles of Great Britain”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Build a website with WordPress.com
%d bloggers like this: