Blog
Early County Wills, Estates, Marriages
Early County was created in 1818 containing 3,750 square miles in Southwest Georgia.
The original occupants of this land were the Creeks who were removed under the Treaty of Ft Jackson on August 9, 1814.
This treaty settled all of the claims to the South Georgia land.
It was named for Governor Peter Early, a native of Virginia; Congressional delegate and Governor from 1813 to 1815.
The first settlers came in 1817, settling on Harrod's Creek (now Old Factory Creek) on the Chattahoochee River.
Earliest Settlers: L. B. Avirett, Thomas Avera, M. H. Alexander, Alexander W. Bealer, Woodson F. Davis, George Colley, Joseph Lane, L. D. Gay, A. J. Lewis, W. R. Puckett, Loren Russell, R. H. Sheffield and L. C. Ward.
The first court was not held until 1820.
The county seat is Blakely.
Early County Records Available to Members of Georgia Pioneers
Marriages
Index to Early County Marriages 1823-1834
Index to Early County Marriages 1868-1889
Digital Images of Early County Wills 1822-1832
Testators: Broom, Thomas;Cole, Mark;  Curry, Samuel;      Gilley, John; Griffith, John; Holmes, Nathaniel; Jackson, Robert;      Jackson, Samuel; Kelly, William; Liverman, Brown; McCulloh, Anthony ; McCulloh, Leonard; Porter, Benjamin; Sheffield, Isham ;      Smith, Laden; Watson, Alexander
Digital Images of Early County Wills 1839-1895
Testators: Alexander, James; Alexander, Martin ;Averitt, Abner; Averitt, Ephaly ;Bailey, William ;Bird, James ;Bryan, Sylvanus ;Bryan, William ;Calhoun, James; Calhoun, William ;Chivers, Larkin ;Coley, Philip ;Collier, Benjamin ;Collier, John ;Cook, W. C. ;Crawford, Joel ;Deal, John ;Dill, Job ;Dixon, Jeremiah ;Douglass, Elisha ;Ford, William ;Freeman, James ;Gilbert, John ;Glenn, James ;Goocher, Milton ;Grier, Moses ;Griffin, William ;Grimsley, Joseph ;Grimsley, Lewis ;Grimsley, Sarah ;Grist, Martha ;Harrell, Jane ;Harris, Joshua ;Haynes, Thomas ;Hays, Mary ; Hightower, Joel ;Holmes, Richard ;Howell, Edward ;Hutchins, Anthony ;Hutchins, Henry ;Hutchins, Jefferson ;Johnson, Joshua ;Jones, Thomas ;Knight, William ;Lee, Clem; Lee, Zadock ;Lewis, Mathew ;Lundy, Mary ;Mercier, Elizabeth ;Mercier, George ;Odum, Charity ;Parramore, Susannah ;Perry, Elizabeth ;Perry, Joel; Pirkle, Richard ;Powell, Coleman ;Powell, Hiram ;Powers, Sarah ;Reese, Hillman ;Ritchie, James ;Robertson, James ;Sammons, William ;Sanders, Mark ;Shackelford, Harriet ;Shackelford, James ;Taylor, James Jones ;Temples, Frederick; Thompson, Robert; Wade, William ;Wilson, Solomon; Yeldell, Robert
Indexes to Probate Records
Index to Early County Will Bk B, 1839-1895.
Index to Early County Will Bk 2, 1896-1941.
Miscellaneous Wills
Discover when and where your relatives graduated from Georgia Schools.
See GA Graduates and Photos
The Failed Expedition of Benedict Arnold
By Jeannette Holland Austin
During the early part of September of 1775, Colonel Benedict Arnold led a force of 1,100 Continental Army troops from Cambridge, Massachusetts through wilderness country (now Maine).
But his boats going upon the Kennebec River leaked, ruining gunpowder, spoiling food supplies and more than a third of his men turned back before reaching the land between the Kennebec and Chaudiere rivers.
The troops, inexperienced in handling boats in white water, ended up losing supplies and boats.
When Arnold finally reached the French settlements above above the Saint Lawrence River, his force was reduced to 600 starving men who had  traveled about 350 miles through a poorly charted wilderness.
Without the assistance of the local French Canadians, his troops would have never crossed the Saint Lawrence river.
By the middle of November they reached Quebec City and attempted to put it under siege.
When this failed, Arnold withdrew to Point-aux-Trembles until Colonel Montgomery, the officer of the other part of the expedition, arrived to lead another unsuccessful attack on the city.
Among the Montgomery troops was Clark Blandford, later resident of Elbert County, Georgia,  who was captured and later paroled.
Blandford returned to New Jersey where he entered the Militia serving until end of war, first under Colonel John Nelson, and then under Lieutenant Colonel Scudder.
He helped in the capture of Bennets Island and was in the battles of Short Hills, Trenton, Springfield, Mud Island and Monmouth.
During his term he served as sergeant and sergeant-major and was wounded in acion three times.
See how Easy it is to read old Wills online
Members may also print/download image