FEB
APR
May
4
2015
2016
2017
17 captures
6 Nov 14 - 4 Apr 16
Close Help
SECTIONS
Welcome
Log in
Subscribe
Support
Logout
← BACK TO ARTICLE
LOG IN
LOG OUT
18° Partly cloudy High: 30° | Low: 20° Ten Day Forecast
Home
News
More in News
Local & State
Nation & World
Cops & Courts
Schools & Education
Community News
Special Features
The Maine Forecast
Politics
More in Politics
Politics
Election 2016
Capitol Ticker
Business
More in Business
A Word with the Boss
On the Job
Portfolio
People on the Move
Sports
More in Sports
High School Sports
New England Patriots
Boston Bruins
Portland Pirates
Boston Celtics
Maine Red Claws
Outdoors
Varsity Maine Awards
Opinion
More in Opinion
Editorials
Columns
Bill Nemitz
Greg Kesich
Letters
Maine Voices Live
Food
More in Food
Restaurant reviews
Recipes
Cookbook Reviews
Source
More in Source
Green Plate Special
Maine Gardener
Meet
Sea Change
Source Awards
Lifestyle
More in Lifestyle
Things to Do
MaineToday Magazine
Arts & Entertainment
Books
Scene & Heard
Religion and Values
Flashback
Crossword
Sudoku
Maine Today
Real Estate
More in Real Estate
Featured Home
Home of the Week
Design
Open Houses
Obituaries
Auto
More in Auto
New Cars
Used Cars
Jobs
Open
Sign in or Subscribe .
See Offers
Outdoors
Posted
November 2, 2014
Updated November 9, 2014
increase font size
Hiking in Maine: Walking in the footsteps of a pre-traitorous Benedict Arnold
Hikers can explore a 13-mile segment of history thanks to the Arnold Expedition Historical Society.
By Carey Kish
Share
Comment
Read Article
In early October 1775, Gen. Benedict Arnold and a contingent of 1,100 American soldiers made the portage over the Great Carrying Place between the Kennebec River and the Dead River on their wilderness expedition to Quebec City.
The lengthy and difficult portage greatly weakened Arnold’s army, which ultimately failed in its attempt to wrest control of the city from the British and thereby expand the Revolutionary War, forcing it to retreat in defeat in the dead of winter.
Hikers today can explore this incredible 13-mile segment of history thanks to the Arnold Expedition Historical Society, which recently opened the Great Carrying Place Portage Trail after seven years of hard work and 239 years after Arnold and his troops passed through.
Additional Images
West Carry Pond offers a lean-to that helps make a modern hike on the Great Carrying Place somewhat easier that what Benedict Arnold and his troops endured in 1775.
Carey Kish photo
Search photos available for purchase: Photo Store →
“We wanted to recreate and reopen the route so modern people could get a sense of what the Arnold Expedition had to go through on their way to Canada,” said Stephen Clark, society member and author of a new guide that describes the portage trail.
“It’s a way of expressing history by allowing us to walk in their footsteps.”
The new trail begins at Carrying Place Stream on the western shore of Wyman Lake, a 15-mile stretch of the Kennebec River impounded by Wyman Dam in 1930.
The trail climbs 750 feet to East Carry Pond and then proceeds to Middle Carry Pond.
Just beyond at Sandy Stream, the trail joins the Appalachian Trail and follows it for some three miles, crossing Arnold Bog and then traveling over a wooded ridge to reach West Carry Pond at Arnold Point.
Ahead, the trail reaches its 1,519-foot high point just north of Roundtop Mountain before descending to cross Long Falls Dam Road on its way to Flagstaff Lake, which submerged the Dead River in 1950.
Hikers can walk the Great Carrying Place Portage Trail in short segments, make it a long day hike, or turn it into an overnight journey with a stay at the AT lean-to on West Carry Pond.
Clark recommends hiking the trail from east to west “to more closely emulate the experiences of the soldiers of the 1775 expedition.”
The portage route over the Great Carrying Place was discovered and developed by Native Americans many centuries ago as a way to travel between the Maine coast and the St. Lawrence River, allowing them to bypass the dangerous rapids and falls on the Kennebec River above Caratunk.
Heavily burdened, “Arnold’s men had to make as many as six trips between each segment of the portage,” explained Clark.
“That’s 31/2 miles each way between the Kennebec River and East Carry Pond times six for a total of over 40 miles.”
This grueling back and forth shuttling was then repeated between each of the three ponds en route before the Dead River was finally reached.
Moving tons of heavy wooden boats (some 220 in all) and countless barrels of supplies and military equipment in this manner so depleted the troops that a small field hospital was hastily constructed near East Carry Pond to attend to the sick and disabled soldiers.
It took Arnold’s army nearly two weeks to complete the portage, an amazing feat on its own.
This year the AEHS overcame two major obstacles that allowed final completion of the trail: The National Park Service granted permission to utilize a portion of the Appalachian Trail between Sandy Stream and West Carry Pond, and Plum Creek allowed a right-of-way around the south end of West Carry Pond.
The trail was then blazed with orange paint and directional signs erected.
Hikers will want a copy of Clark’s trail booklet, available for $5.
Another must-have is “Arnold’s Wilderness March,” a full-color map and guide ($6) to enjoying the 80-mile section of the expedition route between the Kennebec and Lac Megantic by car, canoe and foot.
Get them both by writing to AEHS, 60 Burnham Road, Scarborough 04074.
More info: arnoldsmarch.com.
Carey Kish of Southwest Harbor is editor of the AMC Maine Mountain Guide.
Follow Kish’s adventures in his Maineiac Outdoors blog at:
mainetoday.com/blog/maineiac-outdoors.
Share
Read or Post Comments
Were you interviewed for this story?
If so, please fill out our accuracy form
Send questions/comments to the editors.
Recent
Read
Shared
Flashback: Portland's Central Fire Station, 1953
Cruz quietly hits Kasich in Wisconsin campaigning
Interactive map: Tax acquired properties in Portland
NCAA men: 'Brothers' prepare to face off in final
Trump looks to re-establish dominance as Wisconsin battleground emerges
Trade deals costly in key election states
LePage refuses to swear in senator-elect over nomination spat with Democrats
Giant underground ice wall switched on at Fukushima nuclear plant
Will taxpayers bear cost of coal mine mess?
Armed man threatening suicide shot by Westbrook police officer
Estefans to feed homeless as their music starts Macy's parade
Seaweed can help feed the world – but will we eat it?
Solidarity Harvest corrals massive food drive to feed 8,000
M.D. Harmon: Fantasy sports sites feed the unsuspecting to gambling's 'sharks'
Doctors push for warnings on pot use during pregnancy, breast-feeding
Here at MaineToday Media we value our readers and are committed to growing our community by encouraging you to add to the discussion.
To ensure conscientious dialogue we have implemented a strict no-bullying policy.
To participate, you must follow our Terms of Use .
Click here to flag and report a comment that violates our terms of use.
BACK TO TOP
CUSTOMER SERVICE
My Account
Subscriptions
Home Delivery Help
Digital Subscriptions
Reader Services
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Purchase a Photo
CONNECT
e-Edition
Mobile
Email Newsletters
Contact Advertising
Site Feedback
Staff Directory
SITE INDEX
Full Site Index
News
Politics
Business
Lifestyle
Opinion
Sports
Obituaries
Blogs
Video
NETWORK
About MaineToday Media
Work Here
Media Kit
CentralMaine.com
MaineToday.com
© 2016 MaineToday Media