DEC
APR
JUN
4
2015
2016
2017
12 captures
23 Sep 15 - 29 Jun 16
Close Help
Home
Admission, Hours and Directions
Events Calendar
Parking and Transportation
Group Tours
Museum Map
The Whitney Library
Library Services
Pardee-Morris House
Museum Shop
Visit
Current Exhibitions
Photograph Collections
Rights and Reproduction Requests
Online Exhibitions
T.S. Bronson
Upcoming Exhibitions
Past Exhibitions
Collections
Catalog of Manuscript Collections
Research Guides
Alphabetical Index of Manuscript Collections
Manuscript Collection Subject Guide
Brockett Map of 1641
New Haven Bibliography
Early Records of New Haven
Guide to New Haven Maps
New England Gravestones
Whitney Library Associates
Library
School Programs
K‐8 Programs
High School Programs
Self‐Guided Activities
Outreach Programs
Programs on the Green
Scout Programs
Family Programs
Adult / Senior Group Programs
Teacher Resources
Scheduling a Program
Education
History of NHM
Museum News
Press Releases
Newsletter
Staff Directory
Board of Directors
Jobs @ NHM
Facility Rentals
Local History
About
Annual Giving
Become a Member
Volunteer at NHM
Join the Whitney Library Associates
Support
Contact Us
Heroes and Villains Benedict Arnold
For Immediate Release
Patriot or Traitor?
At the New Haven Museum
New Haven, CT, March 25, 2013— Benedict Arnold’s name is now synonymous with betrayal.
But before siding with the British during the American Revolution, Arnold lived and worked as a merchant in New Haven and served as a general in the Continental Army.
Delve into Arnold’s life during the next Spring 2013 Heroes & Villains Lecture at the Museum.
On Tuesday, April 9 at 6:30 pm, Stephen Darley will present “Benedict Arnold: Fallen Hero,” tracing Arnold’s life from his early years in Norwich and New Haven, to his victories won during the American Revolution at the cost of financial and personal sacrifices, to his life after joining the British Army.
The New Haven Museum owns a number of Arnold’s objects from his downtown shop and Water Street home.
Learn more about Arnold in Beyond the New Township: Wooster Square, the Museum’s third neighborhood exhibition, opening in May 2013.
Stephen Darley is a graduate of Utah State University and George Washington University.
After serving in the U.S. Army, he worked as an attorney for the New Haven Redevelopment Agency.
His forty-year interest in the history of the American Revolutionary War and in Benedict Arnold has led to a number of articles on Benedict Arnold and the Revolutionary War.
Darley’s publications includeVoices from a Wilderness Expedition; The Journals and Men of Benedict Arnold’s Expedition to Quebec in 1775 and The Battle of Valcour Island: The Participants and Vessels of Benedict Arnold’s 1776 Defense of Lake Champlain, which is the second book of a planned quartet exploring the significant battles fought by Benedict Arnold for the Northern Army in the first two years of the war.
Darley is a member of the North Haven Historical Society and the Connecticut Society of Genealogists.
He currently serves on the North Haven Inlands Wetlands Commission and the Friends of the North Haven Library.
For more information, visit his website at  www.darleybooks.com .
The New Haven Museum, founded in 1862 as the New Haven Colony Historical Society and currently celebrating its 150th Anniversary, is located in downtown New Haven at 114 Whitney Avenue.
Join the Museum in exploring the stories behind some of the most important historical figures in the history of Greater New Haven and Connecticut.
The lecture series will continue through 2013 as the New Haven Museum celebrates its 150th and the City of New Haven’s 375thanniversaries.
375th Anniversary events at the New Haven Museum are made possible in part by The Woman’s Seamen’s Friend Society of Connecticut, Inc.
For more information, contact Michelle Cheng, Director of Education, at (203) 562-4183 ext. 11 or  education@newhavenmuseum.org .
Upcoming Events
Back
Next
Events on April 4, 2016
CLOSED NEW HAVEN MUSEUM CLOSED
Starts: 10:00 am
Ends: April 4, 2016 - 5:00 pm
More details...
Donate
Generous Support by…
New Haven Museum
114 Whitney Avenue
New Haven CT 06510
P: 203.562.4183 .
F: 203.562.2002
7ads6x98y