The Brazilian 'Earthquake' & The Empire Of Chaos
Submitted by Tyler Durden on  03/10/2016 22:00 -0400
Authored by Pepe Escobar, originally posted at SputnikNews.com,
Imagine one of the most admired global political leaders in modern history taken from his apartment at 6 am by armed Brazilian Federal Police agents and forced into an unmarked car to the Sao Paulo airport to be interrogated for almost four hours in connection with a billion dollar corruption scandal involving the giant state oil company Petrobras.
This is the stuff Hollywood is made of. And that was exactly the logic behind the elaborate production.    
The public prosecutors of the two-year-old Car Wash investigation maintain there are " elements of proof " implicating Lula in receiving funds — at least 1.1 million euros — from the dodgy kickback scheme involving major Brazilian construction companies connected to Petrobras. Lula might — and the operative word is "might" — have personally profited from it mostly in the form of a ranch (which he does not own), a relatively modest seaside apartment, speaking fees in the global lecture circuit, and donations to his charity.  
Lula is the ultimate political animal — on a Bill Clinton level. He had already telegraphed he was waiting for such a gambit, as the Car Wash machine had already arrested dozens of people suspected of embezzling contracts between their companies and Petrobras — to the tune of over $2 billion — to pay for politicians of the Workers' Party (PT), of which Lula was leader.  
Lula's name surfaced via the proverbial rascal turned informer, eager to strike a plea bargain. The working hypothesis — there is no smoking gun — is that Lula, when he led Brazil between 2003 and 2010, personally benefited from the corruption scheme with Petrobras at the center, obtaining favors for himself, the PT and the government. Meanwhile, inefficient President Dilma Rousseff is herself under attack engineered via a plea bargain by the former government leader in the Senate.
Lula was questioned in connection to money laundering, corruption and suspected dissimulation of assets. The Hollywood blitz was cleared by federal judge Sergio Moro — who always insists he's been inspired by the Italian judge Antonio di Pietro and the notorious 1990s  Mani Pulite ("Clean Hands") investigation.   
And here, inevitably, the plot thickens.
Round up the usual media suspects
Moro and the Car Wash prosecutors justified the Hollywood blitz insisting Lula refused to be interrogated. Lula and the PT vehemently insist otherwise. 
And yet Car Wash investigators had consistently leaked to mainstream media words to the effect, "We can't just bite Lula. When we get to him, we will swallow him." This would imply, at a minimum, a politicization of justice, the Federal Police and the Public Ministry. And would also imply that the Hollywood blitz may have been supported by a smoking gun. As perception is reality in the frenetic non-stop news cycle, the "news" — instantly global — was that Lula was arrested because he's corrupt.  
Yet it gets curioser and curioser when we learn that judge Moro wrote an article in an obscure magazine way back in 2004 (in Portuguese only, titled Considerations about Mani Pulite, CEJ magazine, issue number 26, July/September 2004), where he clearly extols "authoritarian subversion of juridical order to reach specific targets " and using the media to intoxicate the political atmosphere. 
All of this serving a very specific agenda, of course. In Italy, right-wingers saw the whole Mani Pulite saga as a nasty judicial over-reach; the left, on the other hand, was ecstatic. The Italian Communist Party (PCI) emerged with clean hands. In Brazil, the target is the left — while the right, at least for the moment, seems to be composed of hymn-singing angels.    
The pampered, cocaine-snorting loser candidate of the 2014 Brazilian presidential election, Aecio Neves, for instance, was singled out for corruption by three different accusers — and it all went nowhere, without further investigation. Same with another dodgy scheme involving former president Fernando Henrique Cardoso — the notoriously vainglorious former developmentalist turned neoliberal enforcer.
What Car Wash has already forcefully imprinted across Brazil is the perception that corruption only pays when the accused is a progressive nationalist. As for Washington consensus vassals, they are always angels  — mercifully immune from prosecution.
That's happening because Moro and his team are masterfully playing to the hilt Moro's self-described use of the media to intoxicate the political atmosphere — with public opinion serially manipulated even before someone is formally charged with any crime. And yet Moro and his prosecutors' sources are largely farcical, artful dodgers cum serial liars. Why trust their word? Because there are no smoking guns, something even Moro admits.
And that leads us towards the nasty scenario of a made in Brazil media-judicial-police complex possibly hijacking one of the healthiest  democracies in the world. And that is supported by a stark fact: the right-wing Brazilian opposition's entire "project" boils down to ruining the economy of the 7th largest global economic power to justify the destruction of Lula as a presidential candidate in 2018.
Elite Plundering Rules
None of the above can be understood by a global audience without some acquaintance with classic Braziliana. Local legend rules that Brazil is not for beginners. Indeed; this is an astonishingly complex society — which essentially descended from a Garden of Eden (before the Portuguese "discovered" it in 1500) to slavery (which still permeates all social relations) to a crucial event in 1808: the arrival of  Dom John VI of Portugal (and Emperor of Brazil for life), fleeing Napoleon's invasion, and carrying with him 20,000 people who masterminded the "modern" Brazilian state. "Modern" is an euphemism; history shows the descendants of these 20,000 actually have been raping the country blind for the past 208 years. And few have ever been held accountable. 
Traditional Brazilian elites compose one of the most noxious arrogant-ignorant-prejudiced mixes on the planet. "Justice" — and police enforcement — are only used as a weapon when the polls do not favor their agenda. 
Brazilian mainstream media owners are an intrinsic part of these elites. Much like the US concentration model, only four families control the media landscape, foremost among them the Marinho family's Globo media empire. I have experienced, from the inside, in detail, how they operate.
Brazil is corrupt to the core — from the comprador elites down to a great deal of the crass "new" elites, which include the PT. The greed and incompetence displayed by an array of PT stalwarts is appalling — a reflection of the lack of quality cadres. Corruption and traffic of influence involving Petrobras, construction companies and politicians is undeniable, even if it pales compared to Goldman Sachs shenanigans or Big Oil and/or Koch Brothers/Sheldon Adelson-style buying/bribing of US politicians. 
If this was a no-holds-barred crusade against corruption — which the Car Wash prosecutors insist it is — the right-wing opposition/vassals of the old elites should have been equally exposed in mainstream media. But then the elite-controlled media would simply ignore the prosecutors. And there would be nothing remotely on the scale of the Hollywood blitz, with Lula — pictured as a lowly delinquent — humiliated in front of the whole planet.
Car Wash prosecutors are right; perception is reality. But what if it backfires?
No consumption, no investment, no credit
Brazil couldn't be in a gloomier situation. GDP was down 3.8% last year; probably will be down 3.5% this year. The industrial sector was down 6.2% last year, and the mining sector down 6.6% in the last quarter. The nation is on the way to its worst recession since…1901.
There was no Plan B by the — incompetent — Rousseff administration for the Chinese slowdown in buying Brazil's mineral/agricultural wealth and the overall global slump in commodity prices. 
The Central Bank still keeps its benchmark interest rate at a whopping 14.25%. A disastrous Rousseff neoliberal "fiscal adjustment" actually increased the economic crisis. Today Rousseff "governs" — that's a figure of speech — for the banking cartel and the rentiers of Brazilian public debt. Over $120 billion of the government's budget evaporates to pay interest on the public debt.
Inflation is up — now in double-digit territory. Unemployment is at 7.6% — still not bad as many a player across the EU — but rising.
The usual suspects of course are gloating, spinning non-stop how Brazil has become "toxic" for global investors.
Yes, it's bleak. There's no consumption. No investment. No credit. The only way out would be to unlock the political crisis. Maggots in the opposition racket though have a one-track obsession; the impeachment of President Rousseff. Shades of good ol' regime change; for these Wall Street/Empire of Chaos vassals, an economic crisis, fueled by a political crisis, must by all means bring down the elected government of a key BRICS player.
And then, suddenly, out of left field, surges…Lula. The move against him by the Car Wash investigation may yet backfire — badly. He's already on campaign mode for 2018 — although he's not an official candidate, yet. Never underestimate a political animal of his stature.
Brazil is not on the ropes. If reelected, and assuming he could purge the PT from a legion of crooks, Lula could push for a new dynamic. Before the crisis, Brazilian capital was going global — via Petrobras, Embraer, the BNDES (the bank model that inspired the BRICS bank), the construction companies. At the same time, there might be benefits in breaking, at least partially, this oligarchic cartel that control all infrastructure construction in Brazil; think of Chinese companies building the high-speed rail, dams and ports the country badly lacks.
Judge Moro himself has theorized that corruption festers because the Brazilian economy is too closed to the outside world, as India's was until recently. But there's a stark difference between opening up some sectors of the Brazilian economy and let foreign interests tied to the comprador elites plunder the nation's wealth.
So once again, we must go back to the recurrent theme in all major global conflicts. 
It's the oil, stupid
For the Empire of Chaos, Brazil has been a major headache since Lula was first elected, in 2002 (for an appraisal of complex US-Brazil relations, check the indispensable work of Moniz Bandeira).
A top priority of the Empire of Chaos is to prevent the emergence of regional powers fueled by abundant natural resources, from oil to strategic minerals. Brazil amply fits the bill. Washington of course feels entitled to "defend" these resources. Thus the need to quash not only regional integration associations such as Mercosur and Unasur but most of all the global reach of the BRICS.
Petrobras used to be a very efficient state company that then doubled as the single operator of the largest oil reserves discovered in the 21st century so far; the pre-salt deposits. Before it became the target of a massive speculative, judicial and media attack, Petrobras used to account for 10% of investment and 18% of Brazilian GDP.
Petrobras found the pre-salt deposits based on its own research and technological innovation applied to exploring oil in deep waters — with no foreign input whatsoever. The beauty is there's no risk; if you drill in this pre-salt layer, you're bound to find oil. No company on the planet would hand this over to the competition.
And yet a notorious right-wing opposition maggot promised Chevron in 2014 to hand over the exploitation of pre-salt mostly to Big Oil. The right-wing opposition is busy altering the juridical regime of pre-salt; it's already been approved in the Senate. And Rousseff is meekly going for it. Couple it to the fact that Rousseff's government did absolutely nothing to buy back Petrobras stock — whose vertiginous fall was deftly engineered by the usual suspects.
The meticulous dismantling of Petrobras, Big Oil eventually profiting from the pre-salt deposits, keeping in check Brazil's global power projection, all this plays beautifully to the interests of the Empire of Chaos. Geopolitically, this goes way beyond the Hollywood blitz and the Car Wash investigation.
It's no coincidence that three major BRICS nations are simultaneously under attack — on myriad levels: Russia, China and Brazil. The concerted strategy by the Masters of the Universe who dictate the rules in the Wall Street/Beltway axis is to undermine by all means the BRICS's collective effort to produce a viable alternative to the global economic/financial system, which for the moment is subjected to casino capitalism. It's unlikely Lula, by himself, will be able to stop them. 
 
Thu, 03/10/2016 - 22:12 | 7298552 Kirk2NCC1701
The Oligarchs of the BRICS have been duped and co-opted by TPTB in the US.
Their foot-dragging and lack or decisive and timely action means that their Window Of Opportunity is probably gone.  The various Trans-Oceanic Trade Deals that the US has cooking is front-running their indecisiveness and lack of action.  
They are 'toast', because these Trade Deals have the USD baked into them, and the combined GDPs of each Pact is far bigger than that of the BRICS.
Math + Action beats Hope + Hype every time, kiddies.  (Those of you who can't handle the Truth or the Cognitive Dissonance, had best go to their "Safe Space".)
Fri, 03/11/2016 - 00:02 | 7298944 ACJ
As a brazilian, I am disgusted with this article. Lula has orchestrated a big corruption scheme, corrupting the judges in judiciary,legislative and executive of course. There are hundreds of proofs, we were going to be the next Venezuela! The only HERO that is fighting a lonely fight is judge Moro. He is applauded in every place he goes, while Lula has to flee from his own people. Lula can't even walk on the streets in Brazil, he would be thrown in the trash!
The only istitution that lula wasn't able to fully corrupt was our FBI (the federal police and Moro) that is trying to convict him in crimes that are EVIDENT. Lula is a criminal, there are A LOT of evidences, proofs and delation from his former mates that are ALL in prision already! Stop believing this Pepe guy.
 
Fri, 03/11/2016 - 00:57 | 7299105 Joe A
Brazil is corrupt to the bone. Every politician, governor, MP or president that promises to fight corruption turns out to be more corrupt than his or her predecessor. And they do that with the help and to the benefit of rest of the elites. It is just like any other place except it is more in your face and more obvious. That however does not mean that the BRICS are not under attack by that most corrupt institution in the world: Western rogue capitalism. Just like communism was not allowed to be an alternative to it (thank goodness), so aren't the BRICS.
Btw, what is Brazil's relation with the IMF and WB?
Fri, 03/11/2016 - 01:26 | 7299167 4freedom78
pls save me this bs. The BRICS are far worse
Fri, 03/11/2016 - 14:58 | 7299421 bahian
The fact is the PT proclaimed they were different: corruption-free but once in power they wasted no time in stuffing their pockets. The Mensalao scheme was mounted early in Lula's first term.  This huge, complex scandal dubbed Lava Jato is even greater. Lula denied knowing about the Mensalao. Again Dilma and Lula claim ignorance despite Dilma being Minister of Energy and head of Petrobras.  It would be nice if just once Lula was man enough to say "the buck stops here".  I put these people in the offices they held and abused. I am ultimately responsible. But like Cunha, Lula is denying everything. A very astute radio commentary on Band network said the roots of all the Lula era corruption go back to 97 when corruption in PT controlled municipalities in Sao Paulo state was denounced. Lula ultimately suppressed the investigations and called the whistleblowers 'traitors'.  This gave the green light to the much larger corruption to follow. Lula is a union boss of the Jimmy Hoffa category. The fact that he is left-wing does not excuse his corrupt, nepotistic ways. His "buddies" are exempt from close scrutiny. That is why Lula arranged that unions are given public funds and exempted from auditing by the Tribunal de Contas (public investigatory agency or ombudsman).  Lula deserves no pity or whitewashing as Escobar attempts to do.
Fri, 03/11/2016 - 12:20 | 7299451 LA_Goldbug
"Koch Brothers/Sheldon Adelson"
I was wondering if this "species of man" will appear in this story as when a country is being raped they MUST be there soemwhere.
Empire of Chaos = Anglo-Zionist are everywhere if you look closely. Yes, we need to go back in history to get a glimpse of this. In the case of Brazil lets just call these people "The New Christians".
Fri, 03/11/2016 - 07:47 | 7299524 Wahooo
Scary to hear the POTUS candidates talk about Russia and Chna. They are all thirsting for blood.
Fri, 03/11/2016 - 10:21 | 7299904 To Hell In A Ha...
The retarded mindset of "Because I don't like what I'm hearing, I'm going to dismiss it as the truth" reminds me of myself when I was 15. Because you don't like what you are hearing, doesn't mean it is not the truth. Pepe Escobar is right on the money and due to the fact it comes from a left leaning, old fashioned Libtard, it must be dismissed by the usual suspects. "THE TRUTH FEARS NO INVESTIGATION" Either Pepe's assertions stack up, or they don't. The fact remains his assertions stack up. The same forces are attacking Venezuela, while 75% of the blame by ZH posters, blame the socialist government of Venezuela, while absolving and not acknowledging U.S skulduggery and subversion, via the hands of our ever-so-helpful NGO's, human rights groups and the traitors residing in the opposition of the Venezuelan political class and their elites. 
 
Fri, 03/11/2016 - 10:30 | 7299946 Dominus Ludificatio
The NSA with the help of their five amigos  seems to discover corruption only on the ones who exclude the US from their business. When times are bad ,the victim/enemy is ripe for the takeover. They are sending a message to every country who is thinking of not playimg with US.
Fri, 03/11/2016 - 10:55 | 7300051 CookiePrince
Very accurate analysis of what is going on in Brazil these days. I wouldn't put my hands in a fire for Lula or any other brazilian politician for that matter especially not Lula's opponents Aecio Neves, Serra or Cunha. But this is an obviously orchestrated smut campaign with a lot of money and power behind it. 
The article forgot to mention that "pupper master" George Soros is very actively involved too with his rotten Transparency International association (see Ukraine, Syria, Russia,...) and cooperating closely with the corrupt mainstream media in Brazil. 
Fri, 03/11/2016 - 15:39 | 7301363 Theonewhoknows
So they want to undermine Brazil's independence. They have huge resources to face Lula - it will be interesting fight and I'm for the underdog  http://independenttrader.org/global-structure-of-ownership-result-of-4-year-long-research.html