OBenario (396 posts)
Descendent of Brazilian Royal Family is one of the leaders of anti-Dilma group
Luiz Philippe de Orleans e Bragança, of the House of Orléans-Braganza, leader of the group "Acorda Brasil" and member of the Brazilian Royal Family.
Created by dissidents of other virtual groups, the movement "Acorda Brasil" has 117,000 followers on Facebook, an ultraliberal economic agenda, and several names of the high society among its founders.
One of the leaders of the group, for example, is the businessman Luiz Philippe de Orleans e Bragança, nephew of Luís Gastão de Orleans e Bragança, the man that, if Brazil was still a monarchy, would be the emperor of the nation.
(...)
Graduated in political sciences, Luis is one of the heads of the anti-government protests.
He became involved in the movement three years ago.
Luiz likes to describe himself as a small/middle size businessman active in the branch of distribution of car parts.
He says that he feels the deterioration of the economic situation of the country everyday.
"Everyday I receive a phone call of someone saying he's going out of business".
His major client profits R$ 30 million per year, he says.
(...)
"Acorda Brasil" defends overthrowing Dilma Rousseff "by any means".
"In any other country there would be a mechanism to review this, to change .
How can we sustain a government that is rejected by 80% of the population?
Nothing happens?"
, he asks.
The businessman criticizes cash transfer programs, such as Bolsa Família ("family allowance").
"Each state should determine its priorities.
There is a cost.
We can not keep these programs forever."
Replies to this discussion thread
15 replies
Descendent of Brazilian Royal Family is one of the leaders of anti-Dilma group (Original post)
OBenario
Aug 2015
#1
1.
Let's bring back the bad old days!
...I swear I've heard that too here in America...
Judi Lynn (104,089 posts)
2.
The more we hear, the crazier they sound!
The loonies are loose, no doubt about it.
Found a photo of the uncle of the "royal" man sitting on the bench, above.
It's hard to believe these clowns are still clinging to the idea of their monarchy.
Lunatics.
Their greed has eaten away their brains.
Bring back the dictatorship, and/or bring back the Royal House of Brazil.
Wow.
I really hope these guys are a much smaller group than the right-wing owned corporate "news" media want us to believe.
They would have a rebellion on their hands they would NEVER forget if they tried to force that crap upon the people of Brazil.
4.
From wikipedia
The Empire of Brazil was a 19th-century state that broadly comprised the territories which form modern Brazil and Uruguay.
Its government was a representative parliamentary constitutional monarchy under the rule of Emperors Dom Pedro I and his son Dom Pedro II.
A colony of the Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil became the seat of the Portuguese colonial Empire in 1808, when the Portuguese Prince regent, later King Dom João VI, fled from Napoleon's invasion of Portugal and established himself and his government in the Brazilian city of Rio de Janeiro.
João VI later returned to Portugal, leaving his eldest son and heir, Pedro, to rule the Kingdom of Brazil as regent.
On 7 September 1822, Pedro declared the independence of Brazil and, after waging a successful war against his father's kingdom, was acclaimed on 12 October as Pedro I, the first Emperor of Brazil.
The new country was huge but sparsely populated and ethnically diverse.
Unlike most of the neighboring Hispanic American republics, Brazil had political stability, vibrant economic growth, constitutionally guaranteed freedom of speech and respect for civil rights of its subjects, albeit with legal restrictions on women and slaves, the latter regarded as property and not citizens.
The empire's bicameral parliament was elected under comparatively democratic methods for the era, as were the provincial and local legislatures.
This led to a long ideological conflict between Pedro I and a sizable parliamentary faction over the role of the monarch in the government.
He faced other obstacles.
The unsuccessful Cisplatine War against the neighboring United Provinces of the Río de la Plata in 1828 led to the secession of the province of Cisplatina (later to become Uruguay).
In 1826, despite his role in Brazilian independence, he became the king of Portugal; he immediately abdicated in favor of his eldest daughter.
Two years later, her throne was usurped by Pedro I's younger brother.
Unable to deal with both Brazilian and Portuguese affairs, Pedro I abdicated on 7 April 1831 and immediately departed for Europe to restore his daughter to her throne.
Pedro I's successor was his five-year-old son, Pedro II.
As the latter was still a minor, a weak regency was created.
The power vacuum resulting from the absence of a ruling monarch as the ultimate arbiter in political disputes led to regional civil wars between local factions.
Having inherited an empire on the verge of disintegration, Pedro II, once declared of age, managed to bring peace and stability to the country, which eventually became an emerging international power.
Brazil was victorious in three international conflicts (the Platine War, the Uruguayan War and the Paraguayan War) under Pedro II's rule, and the Empire prevailed in several other international disputes and outbreaks of domestic strife.
With prosperity and economic development came an influx of European immigration, including Protestants and Jews, although Brazil remained mostly Catholic.
Slavery, which had initially been widespread, was restricted by successive legislation until its final abolition in 1888.
Brazilian visual arts, literature and theater developed during this time of progress.
Although heavily influenced by European styles that ranged from Neoclassicism to Romanticism, each concept was adapted to create a culture that was uniquely Brazilian.
Even though the last four decades of Pedro II's reign were marked by continuous internal peace and economic prosperity, he had no desire to see the monarchy survive beyond his lifetime and made no effort to maintain support for the institution.
The next in line to the throne was his daughter Isabel, but neither Pedro II nor the ruling classes considered a female monarch acceptable.
Lacking any viable heir, the Empire's political leaders saw no reason to defend the monarchy.
After a 58-year reign, on 15 November 1889 the Emperor was overthrown in a sudden coup d'état led by a clique of military leaders whose goal was the formation of a republic headed by a dictator....
Judi Lynn (104,089 posts)
8.
Unbelievably vivid history drop you've shared.
So much happened in Brazil, and NOTHING about it was ever addressed in US corporate education of the people here.
This information was a good, concentrated package to ponder.
Never heard the term "Café com leite politics."
It's good to have read about it tonight, through this window you've opened for us.
It has been an intense struggle from the first when the Europeans arrived.
I am so glad the people haven't been silenced yet.
Hope their destiny is to gain the freedom their ancestors had stolen  from them.
I think it's inevitable, in the end.
There are far more human beings than would-be rulers, no matter how many military weapons the tyrants can command.
Thank you.
OBenario (396 posts)
14.
Yes, for 81 years.
From 1808 to 1822 as part of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and Algarves and from 1822 to 1889 as a the independent Empire of Brazil.
Napoleon's Continental Blockade created an interesting situation: the Portuguese court left Portugal to avoid the French troops and John VI transferred the capital of the Portuguese empire from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro.
In order to do that, he had to elevate Brazil from the condition of colony to the status of a kingdom.
And when it was safe for the king to return to Europe, the Brazilians did not accept to lose the status of kingdom and go back to being a colony, as the Portuguese court intended.
Therefore, his son had only two options: declaring Brazil's independence and keeping both nations under the control of the same royal family - the Orleans-Braganza -, or facing a Republican revolution as all the other colonies in South America were doing at the time.
He was smart.
Anyway, the branch of the Orleans-Braganza in Portugal are traditionally more devoted to the royalist cause than their cousins in Brazil.
It may be changing, though.
13.
Regardless of who's pushing for impeachment...
... there should be a legal reason for asking it.
From the New York Times:
"Though the investigations have created huge political problems for Ms. Rousseff and have raised questions about her seven-year tenure as the chairwoman of Petrobras, before she became president, she has admirably made no effort to constrain or influence the investigations.
On the contrary, she has consistently emphasized that no one is above the law, and has supported a new term for the prosecutor general in charge of the Petrobras probe, Rodrigo Janot.
So far, the investigations have found no evidence of illegal actions on her part.
And while she is no doubt responsible for policies and much of the mismanagement that have laid Brazil’s economy low, these are not impeachable offenses.
Forcing Ms. Rousseff out of office without any concrete evidence of wrongdoing would do serious damage to a democracy that has been gaining strength for 30 years without any balancing benefit.
And there is nothing to suggest that any leaders in the wings would do a better job with the economy.
There is no question that Brazilians are facing tough and frustrating times, and things are likely to get worse before they get better.
Ms. Rousseff is also in for a lot more trouble and criticism.
But the solution must not be to undermine the democratic institutions that are ultimately the guarantors of stability, credibility and honest government."