Apr
MAY
Jun
18
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
18 May 16 - 18 May 16
Close Help
Wikia
Skip to Content Skip to Wiki Navigation Skip to Site Navigation
The Home of Fandom
Games Movies TV
Explore Wikia
Games
Movies
TV
Trending Wikias
Community Central
Sign In
Register
Username
Password
Forgot your password?
Stay logged in
Or
Connect
Start a wikia
Advertisement
Total War: Alternate Reality Wiki Navigation
On the Wiki
Wiki Activity
Random page
Videos
Images
Popular pages
Most visited articles
Avner Kaufman
Nick Bradshaw
Adem Jashari
Andre Baptiste, Sr.
Fuad Masum
Suheil al-Hassan
Operation Wrath of God
Killed
Yoshimoto Imagawa
Naomori Ii
Murad Bey
Norishige Obata
Nagayasu Sogo
Mitsuhide Akechi
Hidemitsu Akechi
Catholics
Isabella of Castile
Constance of Burgundy
Laureano Torres y Ayala
Timo de Collar
Frisco de Berrones
Monte La Barca
Juan Ponce de Leon
Community
Recent blog posts
Forum
Contribute
Edit this Page
Add a Video
Add a Photo
Add a Page
Wiki Activity
Watchlist Random page Recent changes
Brazilian Empire
15,297pages on
this wiki
Edit
Classic editor
History
Comments0
The Brazilian Empire (7 September 1822-15 November 1889) was a 19th-century state that encompassed the territories which form modern Brazil and Uruguay .
Founded after the declaration of independence from Portugal , the Brazilian Empire was led by Dom Pedro I and his son, Dom Pedro II .
Brazil was politically-stable, unlike its neighbors, and fielded a powerful army in all of its wars.
In 1828, after the Cisplatine War , it lost control of Uruguay , which became an independent country.
However, in 1836-37 it liberated Bolivian Amazonas and conquered Bolivian La Paz from Bolivia , expanding its borders.
It further proved its strength intervening in the Uruguayan Civil Wars , the Platine War (1851-52), the Uruguayan War (1864-65), and the War of the Triple Alliance (1864-1870), during which it provided a major army to assist their allies of Argentina and Uruguay (in some cases, factions of the two countries).
In 1889, Brazil became a republic after the  Proclamation of the Republic .
History
Edit
Provinces of Brazil in 1824
The Brazilian Empire was declared on 7 September 1822 in the Brazilian Declaration of Independence , and on 12 October 1822 Dom Pedro I (the son of King Joao VI of Portugal ) acceded the throne as the first Emperor.
After defeating the army of Portugal in a few coastal sieges and skirmishes, Brazil became fully independent and on 25 March 1824 passed its Constitution, becoming a fully-independent country.
Extent of the Brazilian Empire in 1828
As an infant Hispanic-American country, Brazil had political stability, vibrant economic growth, constitutionally-guaranteed freedom of speech and respect of civil rights for its subjects, and was a democratic country, although women and slaves both had lesser rights (slaves were not citizens).
There was a bicameral parliament, consisting of the General Assembly Senate upper house and the Brazilian Chamber of Deputies lower house.
Brazil was a multicultural nation with a huge population, ranging from white Brazilians to Afro-Brazilians and native Americans.
Dom Pedro I
Brazil's first ruler, Dom Pedro I, was torn between several conflicts during his reign.
On 10 December 1825, a secessionist revolt broke out in the province of Cisplatina among the Platineans , the main population of the country.
The United Provinces of the Rio de la Plata were in support of the Thirty-Three Orientals , led by Juan Antonio Lavalleja , and the 6,000 Brazilian regular troops fought the 7,700 Argentine and Uruguayan regulars and militia.
The Argentines defeated Brazil at the Battle of Sarandi , the naval Battle of Juncal , and the Battle of Ituzaingo , despite a Brazilian naval victory at the Battle of Monte Santiago on 8 April 1827.
On 27 August 1828, Cisplatina became independent as Uruguay , a Spanish-speaking country, after the 1828 Treaty of Montevideo .
However, Brazil was granted sovereignty over the Misiones Orientales , a land slightly to the north of the Banda Oriental .
Dom Pedro I abdicated in 1831 after having a small tenure as King of Portugal from 10 March to 2 May 1836 at the same time as his Brazilian reign; now lacking popularity and having to face the stress of Portuguese affairs (assisting his daughter Maria II of Portugal 's war with Miguelite faction leader Miguel I of Portugal in the Liberal Wars ) in addition to Brazilian affairs (such as the free navigation of the Rio de la Plata granted to all powers in the Treaty of Montevideo, a national security risk for Brazil), he decided to give up his throne to his five-year-old son Dom Pedro II .
Dom Pedro II
Pedro II required a regent for the early years of his reign, as he was still a minor.
His regents defeated Bolivia in the Brazilian Liberation of Bolivian Amazonas from 26 May 1836 to 1 February 1837, gaining control of the Bolivian-occupied Amazonas region of Brazil as well as the Bolivian La Paz region; they also defused the Pará Crisis , when the Netherlands attempted to annex the Pará region of northern Brazil, bordering Dutch Guyana .
On 18 July 1841 Dom Pedro II was coronated, taking over the country for himself.
Under Dom Pedro II, Brazil returned to peace and stability after near-dissolution following the political crisis that followed his father's death, and Brazil became an emerging international power.
Brazil defeated the Argentine Confederation in the Platine War of 1851-52, helping Justo Jose de Urquiza in seizing power from gaucho Juan Manuel de Rosas ' cult of personality.
The Brazilians also assisted assisted the Colorado Party and Unitarian Party in defeating the Blanco Party and Federales of Uruguay in the 1864-1865 Uruguayan War .
The three countries of Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay then teamed up to halt Paraguay 's territorial ambitions in the War of the Triple Alliance , a major victory over Paraguay that nearly led to national suicide in Paraguay in 1870.
After these wars, Brazil consolidated its power by abolishing slavery in 1888, and visual arts, literature, and theater developed during this time.
In the twilight years of Brazil, Dom Pedro II made no effort to support the monarchy, as he did not want it to continue past his lifetime.
Without a viable heir, the political leaders of Brazil saw no reason to support the monarch, and on 15 November 1889 the Proclamation of the Republic was made in a bloodless coup d'etat by army officers, declaring a bourgeois dictatorship/republic in place of the empire.
Culture
Edit
The population of Brazil in 1836
As an Iberian-American and Lusophone nation, Brazil had Portuguese culture, with the national language being Brazilian Portuguese.
The country was a diverse mix of whites, Africans, and Indians, although most of them were united by Catholicism.
In an 1836 census, 62.7% of the population were white Brazilians , 32.5% Afro-Brazilians , 2.6% Amazonians , and 1.6% Guarani .
95.2% of the population was Catholic and the remaining 4.8% were animist, adhering to the ancient Native American beliefs.The country was dominated by farmers and slaves, a hallmark of the recently-independent Hispanic American countries, who had a history of Iberian slaveowners importing slaves from Africa, just across the Atlantic Ocean .
Brazil's work force in 1836 was 61% farmers, 19.6% slaves, 8.8% artisans, 5.5% laborers, 1.9% soldiers, 1.9% aristocrats, 1.1% clergymen, .1% bureaucrats, and .1% officers.
There were no capitalists, clerks, or craftsmen until years later.
Politics
Edit
Unlike its neighboring countries, Brazil was a stable country in terms of politics and economy.
The country was a very conservative one, with the ideology being 75.1% conservative, 21.3% liberal, and 3.6% reactionary.
The three major political factions in the country were the Partido Conservador , Partido Liberal , and Partido Caramuru .
67.3% of the electorate vote went to the Partido Conservador, 28.7% to the Partido Liberal, and 4% to the Partido Caramuru.
The country was an HM's Government, and the Emperor of Brazil could appoint a ruling party.
Elections took place every four years, but on 5 January 1839 he elected a new Liberal government a year early, as elections were due for 1840 instead.
The liberals would pass reforms beneficial to the people, which could encourage immigration and therefore increase the power of the workforce and the military.
Retrieved from " http://totalwar-ar.wikia.com/wiki/Brazilian_Empire?oldid=24643 "
Categories :
Nations
Empires
Kingdoms
Add category
Cancel
Save
Around Wikia's network
Random Wiki
Games
About
Help
Community Central
Careers
Advertise
API
Contact Wikia
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Global Sitemap
Local Sitemap
Content is available under CC-BY-SA .
Video Games
Entertainment
Lifestyle