Jan 30, 2010 Mark rated it it was amazing
This is, without a doubt, one of the most harrowing and detailed accounts of the Irish Hunger Strike of the early 1980's that I have read to date.
Hailing from a land similarly rife with sectarian divisions (South Africa), the author David Beresford, a writer for the Guardian newsletter, succeeds fully in squarely illustrating the complicated temperament of conflict that led ten men to willingly starve themselves to death in a prison protest.
Not once does the discussion lapse into blunt politics This is, without a doubt, one of the most harrowing and detailed accounts of the Irish Hunger Strike of the early 1980's that I have read to date.
Hailing from a land similarly rife with sectarian divisions (South Africa), the author David Beresford, a writer for the Guardian newsletter, succeeds fully in squarely illustrating the complicated temperament of conflict that led ten men to willingly starve themselves to death in a prison protest.
Not once does the discussion lapse into blunt politics, instead always taking the high ground and focusing on the more personal nature of the struggle and its larger overtones of humanity.
In a conflict so often characterized by political invective, Beresford masterfully weaves the story with almost unsettling frankness, and cuts through the public posturing and labeling used by both sides to present a ravaging portrait of ten fiercely dedicated men and their families.
Interspersed between the author's narrative of the hunger strikers is a wealth of primary source material in the form of 'comms', small kite messages smuggled out of Long Kesh as the main mode of communications between the strikers and the larger movement leadership.
Many of these written exchanges offer up a vision of the mentality of the radical element of republicanism at that time and also serve the reader some uniquely surprising revelations on the happenings within the Kesh (One set of messages sticks out in particular, in which Brendan McFarlane, the hunger strikers operational organizer, discusses his feelings on the Protestant prisoners in the jail in strangely unequivocal tones - "My feelings are not sectarian.
Believe it or not, I never really was that way inclined...")
Also breaking up the narrative and the sourced material, Beresford includes small details of news and troubles outside the jail that appear virtually at random and strike home the greater implications of the strike on the country.
These small bites, written in eerily measured tones, detail what appear like random deaths and community killings that are both chilling and without discrimination.
This only augments the way in the which to book opts out of partisanship and instead becomes the chronicle of a singularly human tragedy - the 'terrible beauty' of Yeats' poem all those long years ago.
This is a most worthy read of any interested in understanding the history of the movement and its larger mentality.
...more
Jan 15, 2014 Pam rated it really liked it
I chose to read this book because during one of my last trips to Gaza, I met one of the men who was supposed to join the 1981 Irish hunger strike.
He didn't, because it was finally called off after 10 men died in their struggle to force the British government to treat them as political prisoners rather than "common" criminals.
Although I found the book tedious to read at times because it was difficult to keep track of all of the players, as well as to figure out some of the code words and Irish I chose to read this book because during one of my last trips to Gaza, I met one of the men who was supposed to join the 1981 Irish hunger strike.
He didn't, because it was finally called off after 10 men died in their struggle to force the British government to treat them as political prisoners rather than "common" criminals.
Although I found the book tedious to read at times because it was difficult to keep track of all of the players, as well as to figure out some of the code words and Irish terminology the men employed in the notes they smuggled out to their comrades, it served as a fascinating case study of the possibilities and limits of the hunger strike as a tool of resistance.
I have to confess that I remain conflicted on the use of hunger strikes; to be truly effective, you must be prepared to die a slow death.
In this case, it was a price a growing number of families were not prepared to pay, with the strike finally broken when a growing number of families ordered their loved ones taken off when they lapsed into delirium.
(Most of the prisoners themselves stayed committed to the end).
I am debating in my mind what this means for Palestinian political prisoners, who frequently go on hunger strike, but do NOT take it to the death.
Several of them reached 200+ days -- which means they were not on a true, total hunger strike.
The longest the Irishmen could make it before dying was 76 days.
I also felt conflicted because the author (a reporter for the Guardian) did a good job of not romanticizing the hunger strikers and their comrades.
I don't morally approve of deliberately targeting and killing civilians, even when fighting against an occupier.
And many of these men were guilty of that.
Still, this does not detract from my sympathy for their overall cause.
Margaret Thatcher's administration was truly an oppressive regime, and without the resistance, it paid no price of its own.
When will countries learn that when you oppress an entire population/culture, resistance will never die?
It is inevitable that some elements of that resistance will be violent.
The "original sin" is the occupation, and it must end.
...more
Jul 25, 2007 Tom rated it it was amazing  ·  review of another edition
Recommends it for: republicans and unionists alike
This is a journalistic account of the 1981 IRA Hunger Strikes, detailing with a keen eye the struggles of the prisoners and their families, the impact this had on the politics of Northern Ireland, and drawing parallels with earlier Irish struggles.
The book makes great use of the communiques smuggled in and out of the Maze Prison, and catches the dark humour of the men behind the wire - one prisoner who managed to smuggle in a pen, tobacco, a radio and a wad of messages became known as "The Suit This is a journalistic account of the 1981 IRA Hunger Strikes, detailing with a keen eye the struggles of the prisoners and their families, the impact this had on the politics of Northern Ireland, and drawing parallels with earlier Irish struggles.
The book makes great use of the communiques smuggled in and out of the Maze Prison, and catches the dark humour of the men behind the wire - one prisoner who managed to smuggle in a pen, tobacco, a radio and a wad of messages became known as "The Suitcase".
It is a moving read, sympathetic to the plight of the prisoners, and makes a good case for this being the watershed event that led to the Republican Movement fully embracing the political process - leading to a Northern Ireland where Martin McGuinness & Ian Paisley lead the country together.
Jun 15, 2013 Michaelfortin2013 rated it it was amazing
The Spring and Summer of 1981 had the world riveted as ten Irishmen starved themselves to death rather than wear prison clothing.
Why did they do it?
And how could they endure the agonizing pain as their bodies literally ate themselves.
Beresford writes a poignant piece of journalism relating the story and the human beings involved.
This is an emotional story, one of agony and triumph.
To understand the hunger strikers and their conviction, this is a must read.
Dec 13, 2011 Michelle rated it really liked it
An important book in terms of contributing an objective point of view to the literature around the hunger strikes and the wider field of colonisation and resistance in general.
Well-written, gripping but heartbreaking at the same time, it is a book I am sure I will be returning to in the future.
Nov 15, 2011 Brian Mcmahon rated it it was amazing
if you havn't read this read it now.
What a sad moving story, that really shows the mentality on both sides, were no side could afford to lose, really lets you see what was going on inside & outside the Maze at that terrible time.
Shelves: current-affairs
Ten Men Dead offers very good insight into the 1980 Maze Hunger Strike.
While it is a consuming read, it offers a balanced account of not only the hunger strike, but also the political, social and religious climate in Ireland at that time.
The author also does a nice job explaining the context of the strike and prision, which I think dispells many misconceptions surrounding the IRA and its command structure as well as the resulting decisions of the prisoners.
I also appreciated the level of deta Ten Men Dead offers very good insight into the 1980 Maze Hunger Strike.
While it is a consuming read, it offers a balanced account of not only the hunger strike, but also the political, social and religious climate in Ireland at that time.
The author also does a nice job explaining the context of the strike and prision, which I think dispells many misconceptions surrounding the IRA and its command structure as well as the resulting decisions of the prisoners.
I also appreciated the level of detail as it put the story into better context for me -- I could visulaize many places easily.
I would have given this five stars, but I felt the inclusion of the fictional text took away from the general plot and served no real purpose.
Overall, this book is excellent.
...more
Jun 27, 2014 Malaka Mohammed rated it it was amazing
What makes this book worth reading is its focus on personal stories of the Irish hunger strikers.
You reach to a point where you need to cry of how unbearable their lives used to be.
"Ten Men Dead" also presents the letters of the strikers that managed to send to the outside world.
In a lot of instances, I feel like reading a story of a Palestinian hunger striker and how determined and committed to their rights.
From a more personal perspective, I could link Bobby Sands to Samer Issawi.
They are What makes this book worth reading is its focus on personal stories of the Irish hunger strikers.
You reach to a point where you need to cry of how unbearable their lives used to be.
"Ten Men Dead" also presents the letters of the strikers that managed to send to the outside world.
In a lot of instances, I feel like reading a story of a Palestinian hunger striker and how determined and committed to their rights.
From a more personal perspective, I could link Bobby Sands to Samer Issawi.
They are hunger strikers fighting for similar rights and using letters to inform and ask for support.
Both believes that dignity and freedom are more important than food.
Though the former died after 66 days, the latter hasn't following 277 days.
A few factors can be taken into account in this regards, but it's not the space to explain them.
What is more important is the effects that both strikers lead to.
Most importantly, the Irish hunger strike leads to different political changes that you can read more about in the book.
It is awful that Samer Issawi was detained again few days ago though.
...more
Shelves: historical-biographical
This is such a good and thought-provoking book looking at the Irish troubles from the viewpoint of I.R.A. prisoners and their families.
While not condoning the violence it does at least give you an idea as to the reason for it and as the hunger strikers die one by one it's pretty harrowing stuff and a total condemnation of politicians and their hypocrisy.
I've read it loads of times and still find it moving
Jan 24, 2008 Kerry rated it liked it
Recommends it for: History Buffs/People interested in Northern Ireland
Very informative book.
If you are interested in the 1980 Hunger Strikers in Northern Ireland, this is definitely a book for you.
It has actually excerpts from notes smuggled out of prison from the hunger strikers which is really cool for history buffs.
It is a tough read because of the many characters and historical aspects though.
Sep 16, 2007 Helen added it
The author was given unheard-of access to the IRA's library of "comms"--notes secretly sent in and out of Britain's most secure prison.
Critics of the hunger strike say that the hunger strikers were forced to do it, but here you can read in their own words why they decided to have a hunger strike and what they went through.
Jun 25, 2008 Julie Browne rated it really liked it
This story will make you cry your eyes out!
a true story of the H block huger strikers that fought for Irish rights in a time where they were viewed as less than human by the British.
Who in this story are the ones who do not deserve to be called human.
Aug 24, 2013 Pátraic Mc rated it it was amazing
A very harrowing and thought provoking read.
Telling a story of comradeship, selflessness and courage, all in the pursuit of something bigger than themselves.
Dec 29, 2015 Joseph Rasmussen rated it really liked it
This was really my first real step into the story Irish Hunger Strikers (besides basic research), and my recollection is based on my thoughts when I was a lot younger.
However, I remember the extensive research and work involved in Ten Men Dead and was impressed when reading.
It really does provide an incredible insight into the background of the troubles, and indeed to the Hunger Strike.
The only minor criticism is at the outset the narrative tends to take on different courses when approaching This was really my first real step into the story Irish Hunger Strikers (besides basic research), and my recollection is based on my thoughts when I was a lot younger.
However, I remember the extensive research and work involved in Ten Men Dead and was impressed when reading.
It really does provide an incredible insight into the background of the troubles, and indeed to the Hunger Strike.
The only minor criticism is at the outset the narrative tends to take on different courses when approaching an issue or particular element of conflict, which does not lend itself well to the structure of chapters.
...more
Read this book a couple of times over a decade ago & want to read it again.
The author gives as much of an unbiased account of Thatchers heinous government, as that of any Republican struggle.
A must for all students of politics.
Machiavelli himself could take notes..............
Aug 05, 2011 Handrick added it  ·  review of another edition
"The battle to live was the battle to take water.
If he did not hold it down the kidneys would not get flushed out and the poisons would begin to accumulate in his bloodstream, reaching his brain and killing him.
But water had never seemed so revolting; he could smell it in its jug, as well as the ever-present food at the bottom of the bed.
He tried to drink half a pint, then lie down on his bed and concentrate on holding it down.
But it would come.
As soon as he tried to get up the heaving star "The battle to live was the battle to take water.
If he did not hold it down the kidneys would not get flushed out and the poisons would begin to accumulate in his bloodstream, reaching his brain and killing him.
But water had never seemed so revolting; he could smell it in its jug, as well as the ever-present food at the bottom of the bed.
He tried to drink half a pint, then lie down on his bed and concentrate on holding it down.
But it would come.
As soon as he tried to get up the heaving started.
He tried going over to the food and smelling it, then quickly drinking the water, but that did not work either.
" ...more
Shelves: politics , northern-ireland
This is a magnificent book about the Republican hunger strikes of 1981 in Northern Ireland.
It reads pretty much like a novel and gives an in depth journalistic account of the hunger strike, including detailed transcriptions of the communication between the inmates and the outside organisation.
In my view a must read if you’re interested in the conflict in Northern Ireland.
Having recently watched Steve McQueen’s film Hunger this book is striking in that it confirms much of the almost unbelievab This is a magnificent book about the Republican hunger strikes of 1981 in Northern Ireland.
It reads pretty much like a novel and gives an in depth journalistic account of the hunger strike, including detailed transcriptions of the communication between the inmates and the outside organisation.
In my view a must read if you’re interested in the conflict in Northern Ireland.
Having recently watched Steve McQueen’s film Hunger this book is striking in that it confirms much of the almost unbelievable scenes from the movie, I wouldn’t be surprised if much of the research for it was taken from the book.
...more
Jun 25, 2015 Juli rated it really liked it
This was not an easy read.
I took my time to let things digest as I went along.
I am left with more questions than answers, such as how did the peace process progress after then end of the hunger strike.
I was recently in Ireland/Northern Ireland, and it seems that the peace process has worked, but I wonder if that's a superficial face put on for the tourists.
Feb 20, 2016 David rated it really liked it
One of the most profound books of this tragedy I`ve read.
One of the most profound books of this tragedy I`ve read.
...more