JUL
MAR
Apr
16
2014
2016
2017
6 captures
3 Jan 14 - 16 Mar 16
Close Help
Accessibility links
Skip to article
Skip to navigation
Telegraph.co.uk
Search - enhanced by OpenText
Wednesday 16 March 2016
Home
Video
News
World
Sport
Business
Money
Comment
Culture
Travel
Life
Women
Fashion
Luxury
Tech
Film
Politics
Investigations
Obits
Education
Science
Earth
Weather
Health
Royal
Celebrity
Defence
Scotland
Conservatives
Liberal Democrats
Labour
Political Parties
Scottish Politics
Local Elections
General election 2015
Advertisement
Home »
News »
Politics »
Margaret Thatcher
National Archives: Margaret Thatcher's letters to families of hunger strikers released
Secret Government documents also reveal Thatcher's fears after 1984 Brighton    bombing
Margaret Thatcher delivers her speech at the Brighton Conference following the bombing of the Grand Hotel Photo: GETTY IMAGES
By Claire Duffin
7:40AM GMT 03 Jan 2014
Follow
Margaret Thatcher privately expressed regret over the 1981 Irish hunger strike, newly released letters to the families of prisoners show.
In the notes the prime minister said she cared “deeply” about those affected by the protest. But she turned down a request for a meeting from two mothers, stating: “I really do not see how such a meeting could help”.
The letters are contained within files released today by the National Archives in Kew, south-west London.
The files also reveal Thatcher’s fear that she would be targeted again by the IRA after narrowly avoiding assassination in the Brighton bombing of October 12, 1984, and how the attack nearly derailed secret Northern Ireland peace negotiations.
Mrs Thatcher and her cabinet were staying at the Grand Hotel in the city for the Conservative Party conference when they were targeted. The long-delay time bomb, which had been planted four weeks earlier, killed five and injured 31.
Related Articles
Libya warned Britain before WPc Yvonne Fletcher was shot
03 Jan 2014
Thatcher's 120 hair appointments in a year
03 Jan 2014
Thatcher was days from calling out troops during miners' strike
03 Jan 2014
The day Gorbachev took No 10 by surprise
03 Jan 2014
Oliver Miles: I was warned about Libya embassy violence
03 Jan 2014
Afterwards, in a handwritten note to Charles Powell, one of her closest advisors, Mrs Thatcher said: “The bomb has slowed things down and may in the end kill any new initiative because I suspect it will be the first in a series”.
A police officer stands guard outside the Grand Hotel following the Brighton bombing (DAILY TELEGRAPH)
Four months earlier, Mrs Thatcher had sought Cabinet approval for a series of secret liaisons with the Republic of Ireland.
The negotiations helped lay the ground for the subsequent 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement but the documents show Mrs Thatcher was reluctant to allow them to continue after the bomb, commenting that she was "very pessimistic" about their outcome in November 1984.
She added Britain must avoid the impression of "being bombed into making concession to the Republic".
On the hunger strikes, the files show that Mrs Thatcher urged the sister of one of the prisoners to convince her brother his protest was pointless.
Outwardly, Mrs Thatcher was typically unyielding during the crisis, stating there would be no concessions or reform of the prison system until the hunger strike had ended.
But in the letter to Sharon McCloskey, Mrs Thatcher said: “I want you to know that despite what is said and written by some people about my attitude to the hunger strike, I very much regret that young men have been prepared to throw away their lives for an objective which – as I have said on many occasions – no responsible Government anywhere could grant, since it could only aid and abet those who advocate and use violence to political ends.”
The Maze Prison (REUTERS)
She added: “I can only urge you all to impress on him that the five demands of the prisoners amount to a prison regime which no Government could concede, for the reason I have given. It may be that if this is put to him by people he knows and trusts, he will decide to stop his fast and so save his life.”
Liam McCloskey’s mother Philomena also wrote to the prime minister requesting a meeting.
“I hope that you will receive this letter personally as I want you to know of my despair and desperation,” she wrote to Thatcher.
“I am the widowed mother of Liam McCloskey who, today completes thirty days on hunger strike in the prison hospital of Long Kesh [later known as HMP Maze]. I would like to meet you and believe that such a meeting would perhaps give you a better understanding of my position.”
In her response, Mrs Thatcher said: “I do care very deeply about those to whom the hunger strike has brought pain and bereavement, as I do for all those in Northern Ireland who have suffered from violence in whatever form that has taken.
“I hope you will understand that I really do not see how such a meeting could help. I believe myself that the Government’s position has already been set out very clearly.”
Liam McCloskey ended his strike after 55 days when his family intervened.
He was one of a number of republican prisoners at HMP Maze in Belfast who stopped eating in protest at the removal of so-called "special category status" for inmates who considered themselves political prisoners.
They were demanding that members of paramilitary groups should be treated differently from other prisoners including the right wear civilian clothes and to refrain from prison work.
In total 10 men died, including Bobby Sands, who became the best known of the protestors after he was elected as an MP during his time on strike. He died after 66 days.
The hunger strike ended on October 3, 1981, when James Prior, the Northern Ireland secretary, announced prisoners could wear their own clothes and remission lost would be restored.
 
Margaret Thatcher
News »
Politics »
UK News »
Northern Ireland »
Claire Duffin »
In Margaret Thatcher
 
Buy Margaret Thatcher: The Authorized Biography by Charles Moore
Thatcher biography: the early years
 
Margaret Thatcher 1925-2013: tributes and news ebook
Top news galleries
Apple's iPhone: a history in pictures
 
Ahead of the launch of the new iPhone 5 SE, the Telegraph Tech team take a    look at how the handset has changed the mobile phone industry since it was    launched in 2007
Cheltenham Festival Ladies Day
 
Horse racing fans gather for one of the highlights of the 2016 National Hunt    season
Obsolete technologies that will baffle modern children
 
Many children have never seen or used a video tape, camcorder or floppy disc.    Take a look at the gadgets which will puzzle younger people
Celebrities defying the ageing process
 
23 years on from her catwalk heyday, Danish model turned photographer, Helena    Christensen, still has that youthful glow which propelled her to supermodel    stardom
Ultra Orthodox Jewish wedding
 
In pics: Thousands attend wedding between Hasidic families in Israel
30 great quotes about Ireland
 
Culture Picture Galleries
Ireland is a small country but it has played a big role in the history of    modern culture
Baby ape's fabulous fur
 
In pics: Young gorilla shows off a fine head of hair in Rawanda's    Virunga National Park
Comments
17 hottest high street buys
 
Summer dresses and luxe tops in sugary hues are tempting us onto the high    street this week
Migrants return to camp
 
In pics: Refugees travelling to northern Europe return to Idomeni in    Greece
US Presidents: 30 great one-liners
 
Books
Great quotes from White House incumbents: will Donald Trump be joining them?
iOS 9: The best hidden features
 
The latest update to iPhone and iPad software, iOS 9.3, has been announced.    Here are some of the features you may have missed from the original iOS 9
Sony World Photography Awards
 
In pics: National Awards winners revealed for prestigious photography    prize
Pictures of the day
 
Today: Singing seals, a cute baby gorilla and a beached shark
The Apple inventions that never surfaced
 
Apple files hundreds of patents a year for weird and wonderful gadgets - some    of which become a reality and others never make it to our shelves. Here are    some of the best
The 25 best comedy duos
 
Comedy
Martin and Lewis, The Two Ronnies, Amy Poehler and Tina Fey. Laurel and Hardy.    Here's our pick of the greatest comedy duos
Advertisement
Telegraph on Facebook
Advertisement
 
Sign up for our Politics email
Read our latest comment and analysis
More from the web
Advertisement
Advertisement
More from the web
More from the web
Barnebys
 
The women behind the supercar industry
View
Diesel Performance
 
The innovative Shell V-Power Nitro+ Diesel
View
BMW
 
Watch Jodie Kidd test drive BMW’s greenest sports car
View
Culture
 
Diamonds are a man’s best friend
View
Back to top
HOME
News
UK News
Politics
Long Reads
Wikileaks
Jobs
World News
Europe
USA
China
Royal Family News
Celebrity news
Dating
Finance
Education
Defence
Weird News
Editor's Choice
Financial Services
Pictures
Video
Matt
Alex
Comment
Blogs
Crossword
Contact us
Privacy and Cookies
Advertising
Fantasy Football
Tickets
Announcements
Reader Prints
Follow Us
Apps
Epaper
Expat
Promotions
Subscriber
Syndication
© Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2016
Terms and Conditions
Today's News
Archive
Style Book
Weather Forecast