JAN
MAR
Apr
17
2015
2016
2017
4 captures
17 May 14 - 9 Apr 16
Close Help
My Books
Browse ▾
Recommendations
Choice Awards
Giveaways
New Releases
Lists
News & Interviews
Explore
Genres
Art
Biography
Business
Chick Lit
Children's
Christian
Classics
Comics
Contemporary
Cookbooks
Crime
Ebooks
Fantasy
Fiction
Gay And Lesbian
Graphic Novels
Historical Fiction
History
Horror
Humor And Comedy
Manga
Memoir
Music
Mystery
Non Fiction
Paranormal
Philosophy
Poetry
Psychology
Religion
Romance
Science
Science Fiction
Self Help
Suspense
Spirituality
Sports
Thriller
Travel
Young Adult
Community ▾
Groups
Quotes
Ask the Author
Trivia
Quizzes
Creative Writing
People
Events
Sign In
Join
Goodreads helps you keep track of books you want to read.
Start by marking “Ten Men Dead: The Story of the 1981 Irish Hunger Strike” as Want to Read:
Want to Read saving…
Want to Read
Currently Reading
Read
Other editions
Enlarge cover
Want to Read saving…
Error rating book.
Refresh and try again.
Rate this book
Clear rating
1 of 5 stars 2 of 5 stars 3 of 5 stars 4 of 5 stars 5 of 5 stars
Open Preview
See a Problem?
We’d love your help.
Let us know what’s wrong with this preview of
Ten Men Dead
by David Beresford.
Problem:
Details (if other):
Cancel and return to book page
Thanks for telling us about the problem.
Return to Book Page
Not the book you’re looking for?
Preview —
Ten Men Dead
by David Beresford
<iframe id="wrongBookKindlePreviewScreen">
Ten Men Dead: The Story of the 1981 Irish Hunger Strike
by David Beresford , Peter Maas (Introduction)
Ten Men Dead: The Story of the 1981 Irish Hunger Strike 4.26  ·  Rating Details
·  447 Ratings  ·  34 Reviews
In 1981 ten men starved themselves to death inside the walls of Long Kesh prison in Belfast.
While a stunned world watched and distraught family members kept bedside vigils, one "soldier" after another slowly went to his death in an attempt to make Margaret Thatcher's government recognize them as political prisoners rather than common criminals.
Drawing extensively on secre In 1981 ten men starved themselves to death inside the walls of Long Kesh prison in Belfast.
While a stunned world watched and distraught family members kept bedside vigils, one "soldier" after another slowly went to his death in an attempt to make Margaret Thatcher's government recognize them as political prisoners rather than common criminals.
Drawing extensively on secret IRA documents and letters from the prisoners smuggled out at the time, David Beresford tells the gripping story of these strikers and their devotion to the cause.
An intensely human story, Ten Men Dead offers a searing portrait of strife-torn Ireland, of the IRA, and the passions -- on both sides -- that Republicanism arouses.
...more
Paperback, 334 pages
Published         January 10th 1997          by Atlantic Monthly Press
(first published May 14th 1987)
More Details...
Original Title
Ten Men Dead: The Story of the 1981 Irish Hunger Strike
ISBN
087113702X (ISBN13: 9780871137029)
Edition Language
English
Characters
Bobby Sands
Other Editions (2)
All Editions | Add a New Edition | Combine
...Less Detail edit details
Get a copy:
Kindle eBook
Amazon DE
Online Stores ▾
Amazon
Barnes & Noble
Audible
Abebooks
Book Depository
Kobo
Indigo
Half.com
Alibris
iBooks
Better World Books
Google Play
IndieBound
Libraries
Or buy for
Friend Reviews
To see what your friends thought of this book, please sign up.
Reader Q&A
To ask other readers questions about Ten Men Dead , please sign up .
Popular Answered Questions
How do I get to read the book?
like
2 months ago
Add your answer
David Any book store?
Library.
.
flag
See  2 questions about Ten Men Dead…
Lists with This Book
Non-fiction - Something for Everyone
222nd out of 1,019 books — 485 voters
Books about the Northern Irish Troubles
2nd out of 50 books — 8 voters
More lists with this book...
Community Reviews
(showing 1-30 of 1,076)
filter
|  sort: default
(?)
|  Rating Details
Jan 30, 2010 Mark rated it it was amazing
This is, without a doubt, one of the most harrowing and detailed accounts of the Irish Hunger Strike of the early 1980's that I have read to date.
Hailing from a land similarly rife with sectarian divisions (South Africa), the author David Beresford, a writer for the Guardian newsletter, succeeds fully in squarely illustrating the complicated temperament of conflict that led ten men to willingly starve themselves to death in a prison protest.
Not once does the discussion lapse into blunt politics This is, without a doubt, one of the most harrowing and detailed accounts of the Irish Hunger Strike of the early 1980's that I have read to date.
Hailing from a land similarly rife with sectarian divisions (South Africa), the author David Beresford, a writer for the Guardian newsletter, succeeds fully in squarely illustrating the complicated temperament of conflict that led ten men to willingly starve themselves to death in a prison protest.
Not once does the discussion lapse into blunt politics, instead always taking the high ground and focusing on the more personal nature of the struggle and its larger overtones of humanity.
In a conflict so often characterized by political invective, Beresford masterfully weaves the story with almost unsettling frankness, and cuts through the public posturing and labeling used by both sides to present a ravaging portrait of ten fiercely dedicated men and their families.
Interspersed between the author's narrative of the hunger strikers is a wealth of primary source material in the form of 'comms', small kite messages smuggled out of Long Kesh as the main mode of communications between the strikers and the larger movement leadership.
Many of these written exchanges offer up a vision of the mentality of the radical element of republicanism at that time and also serve the reader some uniquely surprising revelations on the happenings within the Kesh (One set of messages sticks out in particular, in which Brendan McFarlane, the hunger strikers operational organizer, discusses his feelings on the Protestant prisoners in the jail in strangely unequivocal tones - "My feelings are not sectarian.
Believe it or not, I never really was that way inclined...")
Also breaking up the narrative and the sourced material, Beresford includes small details of news and troubles outside the jail that appear virtually at random and strike home the greater implications of the strike on the country.
These small bites, written in eerily measured tones, detail what appear like random deaths and community killings that are both chilling and without discrimination.
This only augments the way in the which to book opts out of partisanship and instead becomes the chronicle of a singularly human tragedy - the 'terrible beauty' of Yeats' poem all those long years ago.
This is a most worthy read of any interested in understanding the history of the movement and its larger mentality.
...more
flag 4 likes  ·  Like  ·  see review
Oct 16, 2007 Noah rated it it was amazing  ·  review of another edition
Shelves: the-north-and-the-republic , impressed
One of the best works of non-fiction I've ever read.
Even though it is from the perspective of the Republican Movement, the author is surprisingly objective.
Although he does note that no one can actually be objective about the Troubles.
flag 4 likes  ·  Like  ·  see review
Jan 15, 2014 Pam rated it really liked it
I chose to read this book because during one of my last trips to Gaza, I met one of the men who was supposed to join the 1981 Irish hunger strike.
He didn't, because it was finally called off after 10 men died in their struggle to force the British government to treat them as political prisoners rather than "common" criminals.
Although I found the book tedious to read at times because it was difficult to keep track of all of the players, as well as to figure out some of the code words and Irish I chose to read this book because during one of my last trips to Gaza, I met one of the men who was supposed to join the 1981 Irish hunger strike.
He didn't, because it was finally called off after 10 men died in their struggle to force the British government to treat them as political prisoners rather than "common" criminals.
Although I found the book tedious to read at times because it was difficult to keep track of all of the players, as well as to figure out some of the code words and Irish terminology the men employed in the notes they smuggled out to their comrades, it served as a fascinating case study of the possibilities and limits of the hunger strike as a tool of resistance.
I have to confess that I remain conflicted on the use of hunger strikes; to be truly effective, you must be prepared to die a slow death.
In this case, it was a price a growing number of families were not prepared to pay, with the strike finally broken when a growing number of families ordered their loved ones taken off when they lapsed into delirium.
(Most of the prisoners themselves stayed committed to the end).
I am debating in my mind what this means for Palestinian political prisoners, who frequently go on hunger strike, but do NOT take it to the death.
Several of them reached 200+ days -- which means they were not on a true, total hunger strike.
The longest the Irishmen could make it before dying was 76 days.
I also felt conflicted because the author (a reporter for the Guardian) did a good job of not romanticizing the hunger strikers and their comrades.
I don't morally approve of deliberately targeting and killing civilians, even when fighting against an occupier.
And many of these men were guilty of that.
Still, this does not detract from my sympathy for their overall cause.
Margaret Thatcher's administration was truly an oppressive regime, and without the resistance, it paid no price of its own.
When will countries learn that when you oppress an entire population/culture, resistance will never die?
It is inevitable that some elements of that resistance will be violent.
The "original sin" is the occupation, and it must end.
...more
flag 3 likes  ·  Like  ·  see review
Jul 25, 2007 Tom rated it it was amazing  ·  review of another edition
Recommends it for: republicans and unionists alike
This is a journalistic account of the 1981 IRA Hunger Strikes, detailing with a keen eye the struggles of the prisoners and their families, the impact this had on the politics of Northern Ireland, and drawing parallels with earlier Irish struggles.
The book makes great use of the communiques smuggled in and out of the Maze Prison, and catches the dark humour of the men behind the wire - one prisoner who managed to smuggle in a pen, tobacco, a radio and a wad of messages became known as "The Suit This is a journalistic account of the 1981 IRA Hunger Strikes, detailing with a keen eye the struggles of the prisoners and their families, the impact this had on the politics of Northern Ireland, and drawing parallels with earlier Irish struggles.
The book makes great use of the communiques smuggled in and out of the Maze Prison, and catches the dark humour of the men behind the wire - one prisoner who managed to smuggle in a pen, tobacco, a radio and a wad of messages became known as "The Suitcase".
It is a moving read, sympathetic to the plight of the prisoners, and makes a good case for this being the watershed event that led to the Republican Movement fully embracing the political process - leading to a Northern Ireland where Martin McGuinness & Ian Paisley lead the country together.
...more
flag 3 likes  ·  Like  ·  see review
Jun 15, 2013 Michaelfortin2013 rated it it was amazing
The Spring and Summer of 1981 had the world riveted as ten Irishmen starved themselves to death rather than wear prison clothing.
Why did they do it?
And how could they endure the agonizing pain as their bodies literally ate themselves.
Beresford writes a poignant piece of journalism relating the story and the human beings involved.
This is an emotional story, one of agony and triumph.
To understand the hunger strikers and their conviction, this is a must read.
flag 2 likes  ·  Like  ·  see review
Dec 13, 2011 Michelle rated it really liked it
An important book in terms of contributing an objective point of view to the literature around the hunger strikes and the wider field of colonisation and resistance in general.
Well-written, gripping but heartbreaking at the same time, it is a book I am sure I will be returning to in the future.
flag 2 likes  ·  Like  ·  see review
Nov 15, 2011 Brian Mcmahon rated it it was amazing
if you havn't read this read it now.
What a sad moving story, that really shows the mentality on both sides, were no side could afford to lose, really lets you see what was going on inside & outside the Maze at that terrible time.
flag 2 likes  ·  Like  ·  see review
Aug 13, 2008 Kathleen rated it really liked it
Recommends it for: Interested in Irish Affairs
Recommended to Kathleen by: Kelly
Shelves: current-affairs
Ten Men Dead offers very good insight into the 1980 Maze Hunger Strike.
While it is a consuming read, it offers a balanced account of not only the hunger strike, but also the political, social and religious climate in Ireland at that time.
The author also does a nice job explaining the context of the strike and prision, which I think dispells many misconceptions surrounding the IRA and its command structure as well as the resulting decisions of the prisoners.
I also appreciated the level of deta Ten Men Dead offers very good insight into the 1980 Maze Hunger Strike.
While it is a consuming read, it offers a balanced account of not only the hunger strike, but also the political, social and religious climate in Ireland at that time.
The author also does a nice job explaining the context of the strike and prision, which I think dispells many misconceptions surrounding the IRA and its command structure as well as the resulting decisions of the prisoners.
I also appreciated the level of detail as it put the story into better context for me -- I could visulaize many places easily.
I would have given this five stars, but I felt the inclusion of the fictional text took away from the general plot and served no real purpose.
Overall, this book is excellent.
...more
flag 1 like  ·  Like  ·  see review
Jun 27, 2014 Malaka Mohammed rated it it was amazing
What makes this book worth reading is its focus on personal stories of the Irish hunger strikers.
You reach to a point where you need to cry of how unbearable their lives used to be.
"Ten Men Dead" also presents the letters of the strikers that managed to send to the outside world.
In a lot of instances, I feel like reading a story of a Palestinian hunger striker and how determined and committed to their rights.
From a more personal perspective, I could link Bobby Sands to Samer Issawi.
They are What makes this book worth reading is its focus on personal stories of the Irish hunger strikers.
You reach to a point where you need to cry of how unbearable their lives used to be.
"Ten Men Dead" also presents the letters of the strikers that managed to send to the outside world.
In a lot of instances, I feel like reading a story of a Palestinian hunger striker and how determined and committed to their rights.
From a more personal perspective, I could link Bobby Sands to Samer Issawi.
They are hunger strikers fighting for similar rights and using letters to inform and ask for support.
Both believes that dignity and freedom are more important than food.
Though the former died after 66 days, the latter hasn't following 277 days.
A few factors can be taken into account in this regards, but it's not the space to explain them.
What is more important is the effects that both strikers lead to.
Most importantly, the Irish hunger strike leads to different political changes that you can read more about in the book.
It is awful that Samer Issawi was detained again few days ago though.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Mar 12, 2008 Arwen rated it it was amazing  ·  review of another edition
Shelves: historical-biographical
This is such a good and thought-provoking book looking at the Irish troubles from the viewpoint of I.R.A. prisoners and their families.
While not condoning the violence it does at least give you an idea as to the reason for it and as the hunger strikers die one by one it's pretty harrowing stuff and a total condemnation of politicians and their hypocrisy.
I've read it loads of times and still find it moving
flag 1 like  ·  Like  ·  see review
Jan 24, 2008 Kerry rated it liked it
Recommends it for: History Buffs/People interested in Northern Ireland
Very informative book.
If you are interested in the 1980 Hunger Strikers in Northern Ireland, this is definitely a book for you.
It has actually excerpts from notes smuggled out of prison from the hunger strikers which is really cool for history buffs.
It is a tough read because of the many characters and historical aspects though.
flag 1 like  ·  Like  ·  see review
Sep 16, 2007 Helen added it
The author was given unheard-of access to the IRA's library of "comms"--notes secretly sent in and out of Britain's most secure prison.
Critics of the hunger strike say that the hunger strikers were forced to do it, but here you can read in their own words why they decided to have a hunger strike and what they went through.
flag 1 like  ·  Like  ·  see review
Jun 25, 2008 Julie Browne rated it really liked it
This story will make you cry your eyes out!
a true story of the H block huger strikers that fought for Irish rights in a time where they were viewed as less than human by the British.
Who in this story are the ones who do not deserve to be called human.
flag 1 like  ·  Like  ·  see review
Aug 24, 2013 Pátraic Mc rated it it was amazing
A very harrowing and thought provoking read.
Telling a story of comradeship, selflessness and courage, all in the pursuit of something bigger than themselves.
flag 1 like  ·  Like  ·  see review
Dec 29, 2015 Joseph Rasmussen rated it really liked it
This was really my first real step into the story Irish Hunger Strikers (besides basic research), and my recollection is based on my thoughts when I was a lot younger.
However, I remember the extensive research and work involved in Ten Men Dead and was impressed when reading.
It really does provide an incredible insight into the background of the troubles, and indeed to the Hunger Strike.
The only minor criticism is at the outset the narrative tends to take on different courses when approaching This was really my first real step into the story Irish Hunger Strikers (besides basic research), and my recollection is based on my thoughts when I was a lot younger.
However, I remember the extensive research and work involved in Ten Men Dead and was impressed when reading.
It really does provide an incredible insight into the background of the troubles, and indeed to the Hunger Strike.
The only minor criticism is at the outset the narrative tends to take on different courses when approaching an issue or particular element of conflict, which does not lend itself well to the structure of chapters.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Jan 20, 2014 Shaun Neil rated it it was amazing  ·  review of another edition
Read this book a couple of times over a decade ago & want to read it again.
The author gives as much of an unbiased account of Thatchers heinous government, as that of any Republican struggle.
A must for all students of politics.
Machiavelli himself could take notes..............
flag Like  ·  see review
Aug 05, 2011 Handrick added it  ·  review of another edition
"The battle to live was the battle to take water.
If he did not hold it down the kidneys would not get flushed out and the poisons would begin to accumulate in his bloodstream, reaching his brain and killing him.
But water had never seemed so revolting; he could smell it in its jug, as well as the ever-present food at the bottom of the bed.
He tried to drink half a pint, then lie down on his bed and concentrate on holding it down.
But it would come.
As soon as he tried to get up the heaving star "The battle to live was the battle to take water.
If he did not hold it down the kidneys would not get flushed out and the poisons would begin to accumulate in his bloodstream, reaching his brain and killing him.
But water had never seemed so revolting; he could smell it in its jug, as well as the ever-present food at the bottom of the bed.
He tried to drink half a pint, then lie down on his bed and concentrate on holding it down.
But it would come.
As soon as he tried to get up the heaving started.
He tried going over to the food and smelling it, then quickly drinking the water, but that did not work either.
" ...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Dec 28, 2008 Johan rated it really liked it  ·  review of another edition
Shelves: politics , northern-ireland
This is a magnificent book about the Republican hunger strikes of 1981 in Northern Ireland.
It reads pretty much like a novel and gives an in depth journalistic account of the hunger strike, including detailed transcriptions of the communication between the inmates and the outside organisation.
In my view a must read if you’re interested in the conflict in Northern Ireland.
Having recently watched Steve McQueen’s film Hunger this book is striking in that it confirms much of the almost unbelievab This is a magnificent book about the Republican hunger strikes of 1981 in Northern Ireland.
It reads pretty much like a novel and gives an in depth journalistic account of the hunger strike, including detailed transcriptions of the communication between the inmates and the outside organisation.
In my view a must read if you’re interested in the conflict in Northern Ireland.
Having recently watched Steve McQueen’s film Hunger this book is striking in that it confirms much of the almost unbelievable scenes from the movie, I wouldn’t be surprised if much of the research for it was taken from the book.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Jun 25, 2015 Juli rated it really liked it
This was not an easy read.
I took my time to let things digest as I went along.
I am left with more questions than answers, such as how did the peace process progress after then end of the hunger strike.
I was recently in Ireland/Northern Ireland, and it seems that the peace process has worked, but I wonder if that's a superficial face put on for the tourists.
flag Like  ·  see review
Feb 20, 2016 David rated it really liked it
One of the most profound books of this tragedy I`ve read.
One of the most profound books of this tragedy I`ve read.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Sep 08, 2008 Joseph rated it it was amazing  ·  review of another edition
great book about the hunger strikes in Norther Ireland in80 and 81.
Lots of primary source quotes from communications in and out of the prison.
Really great book.
flag Like  ·  see review
Oct 14, 2008 Jenny rated it it was ok
There are too many facts and side notes crammed into this book to make it a flowing narrative, but it did remind me what an awful leader Margaret Thatcher was.
flag Like  ·  see review
May 01, 2011 Tom Blumer rated it really liked it
An interesting look at the IRA's hunger strike in Long Kesh prison and the eventual political ramificaatins that resulted on both sides of the "The Troubles".
flag Like  ·  see review
Mar 31, 2013 Paddy rated it really liked it
Shelves: irish-history
Very well researched and detailed to a large extent.
Anyone who wants to read more into the modern conflict in Ireland should bear this book in mind.
flag Like  ·  see review
Oct 03, 2008 Molly rated it it was amazing  ·  review of another edition
Shelves: irish
Really enjoyed this book - very thought provoking.
Looks at the 1981 Irish Hunger Strikes from the view of the Republican Movement.
flag Like  ·  see review
Aug 14, 2007 Meredith rated it really liked it
Recommends it for: Everyone
Good book, very quick read.
If you are interested in Irish history this books gives a lot of eyewitness testimony and primary sources.
flag Like  ·  see review
Jan 11, 2008 Rachel rated it it was amazing
One of the most accurate and riveting accounts of the 1981 Hunger Strike in the North of Ireland.
flag Like  ·  see review
Nov 12, 2008 Junior rated it it was amazing
Recommends it for: Anyone
An intriguing insight into the "troubles" in the six counties.
Heartbreaking at times
flag Like  ·  see review
Sep 12, 2014 Leslie rated it liked it
Shelves: college
Read 75% of it sophomore year of college (2003-2004), but never finished.
flag Like  ·  see review
May 19, 2009 Shell rated it it was amazing
Interesting how the story is told and to find out about the lives of people
flag Like  ·  see review
« previous 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 … 35 36 next »
new topic
Discuss This Book
topics
posts
views
last activity
Title
2
16
19.
Januar, 08:21 Uhr
More topics...
Recommend It  |  Stats  |  Recent Status Updates
Readers Also Enjoyed
Genres
History
24 users
Non Fiction
23 users
Cultural > Ireland
21 users
European Literature > Irish Literature
13 users
Politics
7 users
Writing > Journalism
3 users
History > European History
3 users
Biography
3 users
Historical
2 users
War
2 users
See top shelves…
Books by David Beresford
More…
Share This Book
Tweet
Share on your website
title link
preview:
Ten Men Dead: The Story of the 1981 Irish Hunger Strike
avg rating
preview:
Ten Men Dead: The Story of the 1981 Irish Hunger Strike
Goodreads rating: 4.26 (447 ratings)
small image
preview: click here
[close]
med image
preview: click here
[close]
BBCode
[url=https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/228668.Ten_Men_Dead?utm_medium=api&utm_source=blog_book][img]https://d.gr-assets.com/books/1389063685l/228668.jpg[/img][/url]       [url=https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/228668.Ten_Men_Dead?utm_medium=api&utm_source=blog_book]Ten Men Dead: The Story of the 1981 Irish Hunger Strike by David Beresford[/url]
+ Share on your website
Trivia About Ten Men Dead: The...
No trivia or quizzes yet.
Add some now »
© 2016 Goodreads Inc
about us
advertise
author program
jobs
api
our blog
authors & advertisers blog
terms
privacy
help
switch to: mobile version
Welcome back.
Just a moment while we sign you in to your Goodreads account.