JAN
MAR
Apr
17
2015
2016
2017
43 captures
28 Oct 15 - 17 Mar 16
Close Help
Search
Newsletters
Crossword
Notices
My Account
Sign Out
Subscribe
Sign In
Menu
The Irish Times
Thu, Mar 17, 2016
Sign In Welcome
The Irish Times
News
Sport
Business
Opinion
Life & Style
Culture
More
Video
Podcasts
Executive Jobs
Subscribe
My Account
Sign Out
Sign In
Opinion
Editorials
Letters
Columnists
An Irishman's Diary
Opinion & Analysis
Martyn Turner
By using this website, you consent to our use of cookies.
For more information on cookies see our Cookie Policy .
X
Rethinking the 1980/1981 hunger strikes
A hunger strike began 35 years ago today which led to many deaths but set Sinn Féin on a path to peace and power-sharing.
Academics will explore this legacy in The Irish Times over coming months ahead of a major symposium in London next summer
Tue, Oct 27, 2015, 12:00
Updated: Fri, Dec 18, 2015, 11:46
Alison Garden & Maggie Scull
A hunger strike and dirty protest demonstration on the Falls Road, Belfast in 1980.
We are now at a key moment in the decade of centenaries that will commemorate Ireland’s difficult, contentious and protracted struggle for independence.
While a huge amount of attention has been, and will be, given to commemorating and reflecting upon the centenary of the Easter Rising, 2016 also marks 35 years since the 1981 Long Kesh/Maze hunger strike.
During the 1981 strike, 10 republican prisoners in the Long Kesh/Maze prison starved themselves to death in an effort to increase pressure on British politicians to return their “special category” status.
This strike was preceded by another hunger strike in 1980, during which seven men started the fast for the same cause, with dozens joining them by the strike’s conclusion.
In fact, it was 35 years ago today that these seven men – chosen to echo the seven signatures on the 1916 Proclamation of the Republic – began their strike.
In December 1980, three women from Armagh Women’s Prison joined them in their fast.
All the strikes, but the 1981 Long Kesh/Maze strike in particular, generated an unprecedented amount of attention, at the time and subsequently, from the public, journalists, politicians, artists and academics alike.
Over the course of the next year, The Irish Times online will be publishing a series of articles by established and upcoming academics, exploring the strikes and their legacies from a huge range of perspectives, as well as republishing articles from its own archive and looking back from today’s standpoint with the intention of shedding new light on a seminal event in recent Irish history and familiarising a younger generation with this complex and contested episode.
In 1976, the British government removed special category status for prisoners convicted of Troubles-related offences.
Since July 1972, special category prisoners had additional privileges due to their status as “political detainees”: effectively, political prisoners.
Yet after March 1st, 1976, those convicted of paramilitary-related activities became ordinary prisoners, a policy referred to by paramilitary groups as “criminalisation”.
The loss of personal clothes, which were replaced with standard issue uniforms, caused the most unrest.
In September 1976, republican paramilitary prisoners, members of the Provisional IRA and Irish National Liberation Army (INLA), refused to wear this uniform and only wore the prison-issued blanket.
This action caused guards to confine prisoners to their cells for 23 hours a day.
Thus, the blanket protest began.
In March 1978, the prison protests escalated to the “no wash”, or dirty protest, which saw prisoners refusing to wash or “slop out” their chamber pots.
In addition, prisoners began to smear their excreta on their cell walls in an effort to break down the rancid smell.
In a final escalation of the prison protests, seven prisoners began a hunger strike on October 27th, 1980.
They made five demands: one, the right not to wear prison uniforms; two, the right not to do prison work; three, the right to associate freely with other prisoners; four, the right to a weekly visit, letter and parcel; and five, the right to organise educational and recreational pursuits.
On December 18th, 1980 the hunger strikers ended their first protest when strike leader Brendan Hughes called off the strike as Sean McKenna grew close to death, believing the British government had conceded on several demands.
When the prisoners realised all five demands were not being met, they began to organise a second hunger strike.
A second hunger strike, led by Bobby Sands , began on March 1st, 1981 to mark the five-year anniversary of the removal of special category status.
This strike lasted eight months, ending on October 3rd with dozens of prisoners striking and the deaths of 10 men.
A battle also raged outside the prison, with 61 murders during this period, 34 of them civilians.
As with the introduction of the internment without trial policy in 1971 and Bloody Sunday in 1972, Provisional IRA recruitment soared.
Furthermore, Bobby Sands’ electionas MP for Fermanagh-South Tyrone delivered an electoral boost for the republican movement.
However, the British media painted the end of the strike as a win for Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher .
It was this second strike, and Bobby Sands especially, that caught the public’s imagination.
The 1981 strike has inspired a huge range of artistic responses, from murals across Belfast and Derry, Peter Sheridan’s play Diary of a Hunger Strike (1982) and Steve McQueen’s film Hunger (2007).
The body of the hunger striker resurfaces in contemporary Irish literature in strange and haunting ways that are not always immediately apparent, from Eoin McNamee’s Resurrection Man (1994), Anna Burns’ No Bones (2001) and Colum McCann’s novella Hunger Strike, from his collection Everything in this Country Must (2000).
These strikes had an international impact too, from petitions in Denmark, France and the US to a street in Tehran being named after Bobby Sands and a mural in commemoration of the hunger strikers in Cuba.
But how has our understanding of these strikes changed over the course of the past 35 years?
What has recent scholarship unearthed about the impact of these strikes on the contemporary political environment in Ireland and Britain?
What impact have these artistic depictions of the strikes had on our memory of them?
Is it time to reassess the legacy of the Armagh women prisoners’ strike?
In addition to publishing these articles here on the Irish Times, our project, funded by the British Academy and the Leverhulme Trust, of exploring the complex effects and afterlife of these strikes will also involve a symposium, where a group of academics and artists will come together to share their work.
This will be held on June 27th, 2016, hosted by the University of Notre Dame's Global Gateway Campus in London and more information will follow in due course.
Over the coming months, we shall publish articles from practitioners and academics working across the fields of political, religious, medical and art history and literary, theatre and cultural studies discussing how our perception of the strikes has changed, and how we, as a society, remember the events of 1980 and 1981.
Click here to book a place at the symposium:
https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/rethinking-the-long-keshmaze-hunger-strikes-tickets-19511596711
Rethinking the Hunger Strikes: a list of contributors to next year's symposium and their proposed topics
The 1981 Hunger Strike and the Irish Catholic Church
Maggie Scull (King’s College London, History)
Negotiating the 1981 Hunger Strike
Niall Ó Dochartaigh (NUI Galway, Political Science)
An Archaeology of Long Kesh/Maze
Laura McAtackney (Århus University, Archaeology)
Hunger Striking and Medical Ethics during the Troubles
Bobby Sands on the 1980 hunger strike:  ‘Fuair muid faic’ – ‘We got nothing’
Did Gerry Adams believe in hunger strikes as a weapon?
The record suggests not
Maggie Scull: Republicans  and historians remain divided over hunger strikes
Ian Miller (University of Ulster, History of Medicine)
‘The Hunger Strike Terrorists’: The British Press and the 1980/81 Hunger Strikes
Roseanna Doughty (Edinburgh University, History)
The Prison Memory Archive
Cahal McLaughlin (Queen’s University Belfast, Film studies)
Representing Hunger: Silence and History
Stephanie Lehner (Queen’s University Belfast, Cultural studies)
Bobby Sands and Chile: Carmen Berenger’s ‘Bobby Sands desfallece en el muro’
Bárbara Fernandez (Edinburgh University, Chilean Literature)
Did the Republican hunger strikers commit suicide?
Maria Power (University of Liverpool, History)
The Hunger Strike Murals
Edwin Coomasaru (Courtauld Institute London, History of Art)
Republic of Ireland Government and 1981 Hunger Strike
Shaun McDaid (Huddersfield University, Political History)
Labour Party and the 1981 Hunger Strikes
David Shaw (University of Liverpool, Political History)
Photographing the Hunger Strikes
Erika Hanna (Bristol University, History)
Queering the Hunger Striker plays
Cormac O’Brien (UCD, Theatre Studies)
Mediating the Memory of the Prison Protests and Hunger Strikes
Emilie Pine (UCD, Cultural Studies)
The Intelligence War and the Hunger Strikes
Thomas Leahy (King’s College London, Political History)
The Final Step?
: The IRA and the 1980 Hunger Strike
F Stuart Ross (Queen’s University Belfast, Political History)
Republican Women and Hunger Striking
Maria Power (University of Liverpool, History)
The Future of the Long Kesh/Maze: Conflicting Interests in Arguing the Past
MK Flynn (Bard College, USA, Politics)
Prison paraphernalia at the Irish Republican History Museum
Katie Markman (Leeds University, History)
Gerry Adams in Long Kesh/Maze: History and Politics
Tommy Dolan (Edinburgh University, Political History)
Redeveloping the H-Blocks
George Legg (King’s College London, Cultural Studies)
Bodies as quotations of history: literature and the hunger strike
Alison Garden, (UCD, Contemporary Literature)
The Provisional Republican movement: 1916, 1981 and complex legacies
Stephen Hopkins (Leicester University, Political History)
Click here to book a place at the symposium:
https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/rethinking-the-long-keshmaze-hunger-strikes-tickets-19511596711
Topics:
Bobby Sands
Brendan Hughes
Gerry Adams
Margaret Thatcher
Irish National Liberation Army
Irish Republican Army
Read More
From the archive: Documents reveal no major concessions
From the archive: Hunger-strike over
From the archive: Starving to death – what it really means and how it was avoided
Timeline of the 1980 hunger strike
Second-class republicans?
Sinn Féin, feminism and the women’s hunger strike
‘A few lousy hours’: time pressure in the 1980 hunger strike
Subscribe.
More from The Irish Times
Opinion
Eamonn McCann: Leicester City proves it is not all about the money
Opinion
Patrick Bury: How the rebels could have won in 1916
Opinion
John McManus: Property funds have become the new ‘bondholders’
Opinion
Vincent Browne: The case for an unstable government
ADVERTISEMENT
ADVERTISEMENT
Sign In
Email Address
Password
I agree to the Terms & Conditions , Community Standards and Privacy Policy
Sign In
Don't have an account?
Sign Up
Forgot Password?
Sign Up
First Name
Surname
Screen Name
The name that will appear beside your comments.
Email Address
Confirm Email Address
Password
Confirm Password
I agree to the Terms & Conditions , Community Standards and Privacy Policy
I would also like to receive occasional update emails from The Irish Times
Create Account
Have an account?
Sign In
Forgot Password?
Please enter your email address so we can send you a link to reset your password.
Email Address
Submit
Sign In or Sign Up
Thank you
You should receive instructions for resetting your password.
When you have reset your password, you can Sign In .
Hello, .
Please choose a screen name.
This name will appear beside any comments you post.
Your screen name should follow the standards set out in our community standards .
Screen Name
Confirm
Thank you for registering.
Please check your email to verify your account.
Sign In
Close
Your Comments
Sign In Sign Out
We reserve the right to remove any content at any time from this Community, including without limitation if it violates the Community Standards .
We ask that you report content that you in good faith believe violates the above rules by clicking the Flag link next to the offending comment or by filling out this form .
New comments are only accepted for 3 days from the date of publication.
Editorials
No quick fix to growing housing and rental crisis
A high proportion of development land around Dublin is controlled by a small number of companies  holding off on activity in anticipation of larger profits
British budget: Testing times for George Osborne
To reach a budget surplus goal will require further austerity measures, more spending cuts and fewer tax reductions
Our Columnists
Eamonn McCann
Eamonn McCann: Leicester City proves it is not all about the money
John McManus
John McManus: Property funds have become the new ‘bondholders’
Fintan O'Toole
Fintan O’Toole: Pathological narcissism stymies Fianna Fáil support for Fine Gael
Una Mullally
Una Mullally: It is not ‘binary’ to focus on women’s achievements
ADVERTISEMENT
Letters
Fining colleges for poor performance
In the moment with Bowie
Deaths at Cheltenham Festival
Europe’s humanitarian crisis
Solving the housing crisis
Social media and Marshall McLuhan
Paying for proper English
Symphysiotomy records
Death and Facebook
Equal school access and the Proclamation
Question Time
2:02 Question Time: Should Ireland be worried about a British exit from the EU?
2:34 Question Time: What can be done to address the shortage of Catholic priests?
1:48 Question Time: Will Leo Varadkar’s latest plans resolve the hospital waiting list crisis?
Most Read
1 Dublin is like a person stuck in a bad marriage
2 Guide to St Patrick’s Day parades around the country
3 Jennifer O’Connell: 37 signs that you might be Irish
4 14 Irish phrases most people won’t understand abroad
5 Fine Gael gains ground in move to  woo smaller parties
Never miss a story.
SUBSCRIBE
Subscribe
About Us
Policy & Terms
Subscribe
Subscription Bundles
Gift Subscriptions
Home Delivery
Irish Times Products & Services
ePaper
eBooks
Crosswords
Newspaper Archive
Dating
Ancestors
Email Alerts & Newsletters
Article Archive
Executive Jobs
Page Sales
Photo Sales
About Us
Advertise
Contact Us
The Irish Times Trust
Careers
Our Partners
Rewarding Times
MyHome.ie
Irish Racing
Entertainment.ie
Top 1000
MyAntiques.ie
The Gloss
Irish Times Training
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookie Information
Community Standards
Copyright
FAQs
© 2015 THE IRISH TIMES
Sign In
Sign In
Forgot Password?
Don't have an account?
Subscribe
Subscriber quick links
Newspaper Archive
Crossword Club
IT Sunday
eBooks
Subscriber Benefits
My Account
Sign Out
SUBSCRIBE
Thu 17/3/2016
News
Election 2016
Ireland
World
Politics
Crime & Law
Social Affairs
Health
Education
1916
Sport
Six Nations
Rugby
Soccer
Gaelic Games
Golf
Racing
Other Sports
Women in Sport
Comment
Business
The Economy
Your Money
Companies
Technology
Work
Commercial Property
Comment
Opinion
Editorials
Letters
Columnists
An Irishman's Diary
Opinion & Analysis
Martyn Turner
Life & Style
Food & Drink
Homes & Property
Health & Family
People
Travel
Motors
Fashion
Culture
Books
Film
Music
Stage
Art & Design
TV, Radio, Web
Treibh
More
You are what you read
eBooks
Offers
Jobs
Family Notices
Dating
Competitions
Video
Film Show
New to the Parish
Give Me Five
Feast
Podcasts
Inside Politics
World View
Second Captains
Business
Róisín Meets
Off Topic
The Women's Podcast
Executive Jobs
Crosswords
Newsletters
Notices
Forgot Password?
Sign In
Invalid email or password.
Subscriber quick links
Newspaper Archive
Crossword Club
ePaper desktop app
IT Sunday
eBooks
Subscriber Benefits
My Account