Feb
MAR
APR
16
2015
2016
2017
8 captures
20 Feb 16 - 23 Apr 16
Close Help
Accessibility links
Skip to article
Skip to navigation
Telegraph.co.uk
Search - enhanced by OpenText
Wednesday 16 March 2016
Home
Video
News
World
Sport
Business
Money
Comment
Culture
Travel
Life
Women
Fashion
Luxury
Tech
Film
USA
Asia
China
Europe
Middle East
Australasia
Africa
South America
Central Asia
KCL Big Question
Expat
Honduras
Advertisement
Home »
News »
World News »
US Election
Bernie Sanders made plea to Thatcher on behalf of IRA hunger strikers
Exclusive: Documents in Vermont archive reveal presidential hopeful Bernie    Sanders made a direct appeal to Margaret Thatcher in July 1981 on behalf of    the IRA hunger strikers
Margaret Thatcher received a direct appeal from Bernie Sanders Photo: AP/Rex
By David Millward , Burlington, Vermont
9:00PM GMT 18 Feb 2016
Follow
Bernie Sanders, the Vermont senator threatening Hillary Clinton’s bid for the White House , made a direct plea to Margaret Thatcher on behalf of the IRA hunger strikers, the Telegraph can disclose.
Mr Sanders made his plea in July 1981 while serving as Mayor of Burlington, the Vermont town where he forged his political reputation.
It is contained in the voluminous Sanders political archive held by the University of Vermont.
These papers also reveal the strong influence the Irish Republican movement had in the town during the 1980s, a time when the “troubles” were at their height.
Bernie Sanders made a direct appeal to Margaret Thatcher in July 1981 on behalf of the IRA hunger strikers
The IRA hunger strikes were the culmination of a five-year protest by convicted paramilitary prisoners, which culminated in the death of 10 inmates.
Mr Sanders wrote his letter two months after the death of the best-known of the hunger strikers, Bobby Sands.
“We are deeply disturbed by your government’s unwillingness to stop the abuse, humiliation and degrading treatment of Irish prisoners now on hunger strikes in Northern Ireland,” Mr Sanders wrote in a letter which was co-signed by Terry Bouricius, a Burlington alderman and sent on July 15 1981.
“We ask you to end your intransigent policy towards the prisoners before the reputation of the English people for fair play and simple decency is further damaged in the eyes of the people of Vermont and the United States.”
Britain’s involvement in Northern Ireland was hugely controversial in the United States , where those of Irish descent wielded considerable political influence.
Even though they carried less sway in Vermont than states such as Massachusetts further south, pro-Irish activism remained powerful.
"We ask you to end your intransigent policy towards the prisoners before the reputation of the English people for fair play and simple decency is further damaged"
Extract from letter by Bernie Sanders to Margaret Thatcher
Only two days before the letter was sent, Burlington aldermen were addressed by Fergus O’Hare, a civil rights activist who won a Belfast Council seat at the expense of Gerry Fitt, from the moderate Social Democratic and Labour Party.
His address, on the condition of the paramilitary prisoners in H-Block, was deemed to be unofficial because of the opposition of some Burlington aldermen.
A resolution backing the demands of H Block prisoners was not put to the meeting.
This resolution backing the demands of H Block prisoners was not put to the meeting
Mr Sanders, however, was quoted in the local press, saying: “I am delighted to have a member of the Belfast City Council coming here”.
Mr Sander quotes in the local press
According to contemporary newspaper reports, another prominent supporter of Mr O’Hare’s right to address Burlington’s aldermen in official session was Jane O’Meara Driscoll – the future Mrs Sanders.
The Vermont files show that Mr Sanders was interested in the heavily criticised “supergrass trials”, which saw a number of paramilitaries convicted on the word of paid informers.
In November 1983, in a letter sent “to whom it may concern”, Mr Sanders urged that the case of another hunger striker , Nicky Kelly, who was convicted of armed robbery in Dublin, be reopened.
Mr Sanders' letter regarding Nicky Kelly
Mr Kelly was released the following year and pardoned in 1992, since when he enjoyed a successful political career.
Mr Sanders was on the mailing list of the Vermont Committee for Irish Human Rights, which held a number of events in Burlington.
They included a May 1983 press conference at Burlington City Hall, given by Desmond Wilson, a priest from west Belfast.
Desmond Wilson, a priest from west Belfast, gave a press conference at Burlington City Hall in May, 1983
According to the publicity accompanying the event, Father Wilson was “emphatic in his belief that the Irish conflict is best understood as one between a local population and an undemocratic foreign power.”
In 1986 Bernadette (Devlin) McAliskey, who at one point was banned from the US, addressed a meeting at a municipal auditorium in Burlington.
Mr Sanders is not the only American presidential hopeful to have had links with the Irish Republican movement.
Donald Trump attended a Sinn Fein fundraiser in New York in 1995 and was filmed shaking hands with Gerry Adams. Their meeting took place several months before the Provisional IRA unleashed an attack in London’s docklands killing two people.
Bernie Sanders in his own words
thetelegraphnews
Follow @telegraphworld
Top news galleries
Apple's iPhone: a history in pictures
 
Ahead of the launch of the new iPhone 5 SE, the Telegraph Tech team take a    look at how the handset has changed the mobile phone industry since it was    launched in 2007
Cheltenham Festival Ladies Day
 
Horse racing fans gather for one of the highlights of the 2016 National Hunt    season
Obsolete technologies that will baffle modern children
 
Many children have never seen or used a video tape, camcorder or floppy disc.    Take a look at the gadgets which will puzzle younger people
Celebrities defying the ageing process
 
23 years on from her catwalk heyday, Danish model turned photographer, Helena    Christensen, still has that youthful glow which propelled her to supermodel    stardom
Ultra Orthodox Jewish wedding
 
In pics: Thousands attend wedding between Hasidic families in Israel
30 great quotes about Ireland
 
Culture Picture Galleries
Ireland is a small country but it has played a big role in the history of    modern culture
Baby ape's fabulous fur
 
In pics: Young gorilla shows off a fine head of hair in Rawanda's    Virunga National Park
Comments
17 hottest high street buys
 
Summer dresses and luxe tops in sugary hues are tempting us onto the high    street this week
Migrants return to camp
 
In pics: Refugees travelling to northern Europe return to Idomeni in    Greece
US Presidents: 30 great one-liners
 
Books
Great quotes from White House incumbents: will Donald Trump be joining them?
Advertisement
Telegraph on Facebook
Advertisement
Latest Video»
Cameron mimes with Osborne in Budget
How much sugar is in your diet?
Mega Tuesday analysis
Angelina Jolie caught in crush visiting refugees
North Korea jails US tourist for 15 years
Sponsored
Business is blooming for Floral Image
Sign up to our daily US Election e-mail
More from the web
Advertisement
Advertisement
More from the web
More from the web
Barnebys
 
The women behind the supercar industry
View
Diesel Performance
 
The innovative Shell V-Power Nitro+ Diesel
View
BMW
 
Watch Jodie Kidd test drive BMW’s greenest sports car
View
Culture
 
Diamonds are a man’s best friend
View
Back to top
HOME
News
UK News
Politics
Long Reads
Wikileaks
Jobs
World News
Europe
USA
China
Royal Family News
Celebrity news
Dating
Finance
Education
Defence
Weird News
Editor's Choice
Financial Services
Pictures
Video
Matt
Alex
Comment
Blogs
Crossword
Contact us
Privacy and Cookies
Advertising
Fantasy Football
Tickets
Announcements
Reader Prints
Follow Us
Apps
Epaper
Expat
Promotions
Subscriber
Syndication
© Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2016
Terms and Conditions
Today's News
Archive
Style Book
Weather Forecast