Castles in Wales
history
Wales has over 600 castles.
According to Wales.com, they have more castles per square mile than any other country in the world.
It is possible to visit ancient castles here.
Battles were fought  with the Celts, the Romans, the Saxons and the Vikings.
This project includes a list of castles and profiles will include those who lived there.
National Trust The National Trust are responsible for several castles and historic buildings in Wales.
CADW Many of the castles are maintained by CADW.
Photos and information may be found on http://www.castlewales.com/carew.html
Partial List with some information: (see complete list below)
Caerphilly Castle
In South Wales, Caerphilly castle is one of the largest castles in Europe.
It has a tower which out leans the Italian Tower of Pisa.
Carew Castle
In Pembrokeshire, Carew Castle is justly celebrated as one of the most magnificent castles of south Wales.
Its position is low-lying, but still prominent in the flat land around the tidal reaches of the Carew river.
The castle stands at the end of a ridge at a strategically excellent site commanding a crossing point of the then-still navigable river.
The modern entrance to the castle is from the east, following the medieval route through the bailey, within which lie low grassy footings of the later medieval service buildings.
These were protected by a gatehouse, a wall and a massive rock-cut ditch.
Excavations have shown that this ditch was in fact a recut of a much earlier one, dug as part of a defensive system cutting off the ridge in pre-Norman, perhaps Iron Age times.
Castell Coch
A castle of fairy tales.
Also called the Red castle, Castell Coch was built and designed in the 19th century for the third marquess of Bute to embody romantic medieval legend.
Caernarfon Castle
Built by Edward I, Caernarfon is one of Europe’s great medieval fortresses.
On 1 July 1969, the castle held the ceremony where Charles Windsor was made the Prince of Wales.
Caernarfon Castle is one of Wales' World Heritage Sites.
Cardiff Castle
Slap bang in the middle of our capital, Cardiff Castle is one of Wales’s biggest tourist attractions.
It’s an impressive example of a fortress, first established by the Normans in 1106.
And only a two minute walk from our city centre shops.
Harlech Castle
Situated on the shore of Cardigan Bay in mid Wales, Harlech Castle played a key role in the national uprising led by Owain Glyndŵr.
After a long siege, it fell to his forces in 1404 and became Glyndŵr's residence and headquarters.
Harlech Castle is one of Wales' World Heritage Sites.
Penrhyn Castle
Near Bangor in North Wales, Penrhyn castle stands guard over the magnificent views of Snowdonia.
If you get bored of the unique furniture collection, the huge private art collection and the Victorian kitchen then the castle also has an adventure playground in its grounds.
Complete List: