GhostHunt Uk
   
Castell Coch
One of the places in wales that really gets out imagination going is castell coch. this is another remarkable building that had an expensive restoration by the marquess of bute in the 19th century. Now Castle Coch looks like a fairy tale castle with its spired towers and points roofs. But there is a dark history to this ancient building and its resident ghosts are only to happy to let you know that they are right behind you.
Castell Coch
 Ghost Hunt at Castell Coch
Ghost Hunting At Castell Coch
 This mysterious location is set high above Cardiff and has a long and torrid history dating back to the 11th Century . When you walk around this castle you are immediately transported back to a bygone age and the fascination of its past is really brought to life. A darker side to Castell Coch is evident as you plunge into the cold dark dungeon. With so many areas and so many levels of history who knows what  will be encountered with a night spent  in this mysterious castle
Your night at Castell Coch will be a night that stays with you for a long time. Castell Coch is a truly mysterious location that has many hidden areas for investigation. There have not been many ghost hunting investigations in the past which makes it quite a raw place to spend the night. There are areas where you may feel quite comfortable carrying out a vigil, however, there are other areas which are definitely spine chilling and make your hair stand on end.
For guaranteed activity call out for ; 
Gilbert de Clare
Lady Gwendolyn
Normandy Knight
 Castell Coch (The Red Castle) was built on ancient 11th century Norman fortress ruins north of Cardiff in 1870. Intended as a country retreat in the hills for Third Marquis of Bute (John Patrick Crichton-Stuart) and his family, Castell Coch was designed by the architect William Burgess. Constant reports of children’s laughter is said to echo through the halls in the dead of night, but as we know something a lot more sinister can disguise itself as a child. Is this truly just the innocent echos of the earls children playing or something else trying to lure you in linked back to the pagan rituals of the normans ? When the Marquis died, Lady Gwendolyn lived on at the castle, but soon left due to the frequent apparition of an eerie lady dressed in white. It is assumed the lady haunted the area long before Castell Coch was built. The spirit is said to be a grieving mother who lost her son, unknown to her he fell down a well and drowned.
Never finding the closure to move on the woman died of a broken heart, she still roams the grounds, looking for the little boy or news of his fate. Another phantom that manifests itself at Castell Coch is the image of a man dressed in cavalier’s clothing, there is a legend of buried treasure on the site, perhaps he comes back to search for his lost plunder. 
 
The Children Of The 3rd Earl of Bute
 
Castle Stalker ( Loch Linnhe ) Location
 
Additional History Of Castell Coch 
11th–14th centuries
The first castle on the Castell Coch site was probably built after 1081, during the Norman invasion of wales.It formed one of a string of eight fortifications intended to defend the newly conquered town of Cardiff and control the route along the Taff George. It took the form of a raised, earth-work motte, about 35 metres (115 ft) across at the base and 25 metres (82 ft) on the top, protected by the surrounding steep slopes. The 16th-century historian Rice Merrick claimed that the castle was built by a Welsh lord , but there are no records of this phase of the castle’s history and modern historians doubt this account.The first castle was probably abandoned after 1093 when the Norman lordship of Glamorgan was created, changing the line of the frontier.
In 1267, Gilbert De Clare, who held the Lordship of Glamorgan, seized the lands around the town of Senghenydd in the north of Glamorgan from their native Welsh ruler.Caerphilly Castle was built to control the new territory and Castell Coch—strategically located between Cardiff and Caerphilly—was reoccupied.A new castle was built in stone around the motte, comprising a shell-wall, a projecting circular tower, a gatehouse and a square hall above an undercroft. The north-west section of the walls was protected by a talus and the sides of the motte were scarped to increase their angle, all producing a small but powerful fortification. Further work followed between 1268 and 1277, which added two large towers, a turning-bridge for the gatehouse and further protection to the north-west walls.
On Gilbert’s death, the castle passed to his widow Joan and around this time it was referred to as Castrum Rubeum, Latin for “the Red Castle”, probably after the colour of the sandstone defences. Gilbert’s son, also named Gilbert , inherited the property in 1307. He died at the Battle of Bannockburn in 1314, triggering an uprising of the native Welsh in the region. Castell Coch was probably destroyed by the rebels in July 1314, and possibly slighted to put it beyond any further use; it was not rebuilt and the site was abandoned.
15th–19th centuries
Bute ownership
 
William Burge’s plans for the reconstruction, showing the surviving medieval features (bottom) and his intentions for the new building (top)
Castell Coch remained derelict; the antiquarian lord, visiting around 1536, described it as “all in ruin, no big thing but high”. The artist and illustrator julius Caesar Ibbetson painted the castle in 1792, depicting substantial remains and a prominent tower, with a lime kiln in operation alongside the fortification. Stone from the castle may have been robbed and used to feed the kilns during this period. A similar view was sketched by an unknown artist in the early 19th century, showing more trees around the ruins; a few years later, Robert Drane recommended the site as a place for picnics and noted its abundance in wild garlic.
The ruins were acquired by the Earl of Bute in 1760, when John Stuart, the 3rd Earl and, from 1794, the 1st Marquess, married Lady Charlotte Windsor, adding her estates in South Wales to his inheritance. John’s grandson, John Stuart, developed the Cardiff Docks in the first half of the 19th century; although the docks were not especially profitable, they opened opportunities for the expansion of the coal industry in the South Wales valleys, making the Bute family extremely wealthy. The 2nd Marquess carried out exploration for iron ore at Castell Coch in 1827 and considered establishing an ironworks there.
The 3rd Marquess of Bute, another John Stuart, inherited the castle and the family estates as a child in 1848. On his coming of age, Bute’s landed estates and industrial inheritance made him one of the wealthiest men in the world. He had a wide range of interests including archaeology, theology, linguistics and history. Interest in medieval architecture increased in Britain during the 19th century, and in 1850 the antiquarian George Clark surveyed Castell Coch and published his findings, the first major scholarly work about the castle. The ruins were covered in rubble, ivy, brushwood and weeds; the keep had been largely destroyed and the gatehouse was so covered with debris that Clark failed to discover it. Nonetheless, Clark considered the external walls “tolerably perfect” and advised that the castle be conserved, complete with the ivy-covered stonework.
In 1871, Bute asked his chief Cardiff engineer, John McConnochie, to excavate and clear the castle ruins. The report on the investigations was produced by William Burges, an architect with an interest in medieval architecture who had met Bute in 1865. The Marquess subsequently employed him to redevelop Cardiff Castle in the late 1860s, and the two men became close collaborators. Burges’s lavishly illustrated report, which drew extensively on Clark’s earlier work, laid out two options: either conserve the ruins or rebuild the castle to create a house for occasional occupation in the summer. On receipt of the report, Bute commissioned Burges to rebuild Castle Coch in a Gothic Revival style.
Reconstruction
The reconstruction of Castell Coch was delayed until 1875, because of the demands of work at Cardiff Castle and an unfounded concern by the Marquess’s trustees that he was facing bankruptcy. On commencement, the Kitchen Tower, Hall Block and shell wall were rebuilt first, followed by the Well Tower and the Gatehouse, and the Keep Tower last. Burges’s drawings for the proposed rebuilding survive at the Bute seat of Mount Stuart. The drawings were supplemented by a large number of wooden and plaster models, from smaller pieces to full-size models of furniture.
The bulk of the external work was complete by the end of 1879. The result closely followed Burges’s original plans, with the exception of an additional watch tower intended to resemble a minart, and some defensive timber hoardings, both of which were not undertaken. Clark continued to advise Burges on historical aspects of the reconstruction and the architect tested the details of proposed features, such as the drawbridge and portcullis , against surviving designs at other British castles.
“This concludes the survey of the ruins and my conjectural restoration. As for the latter I must claim your indulgence; for the knowledge of the military architecture of the Middle Ages is a long way from being as advanced as the knowledge of either domestic or ecclesiastical architecture. It is true that Viollet le Duc and Mr. G.T. Clark have taught us a great deal, but we are still very far behind hand and the restoration I have attempted will I hope be judged according to the measure of what is known or ought to be known”.
—Extract from the report of William Burges on Castell Coch.
Burges’s team of craftsmen at Castell Coch included many who had worked with him at Cardiff Castle and elsewhere. John Chapel, his office manager, designed most of the furnishings and furniture, and William Hassle acted as clerk of works. Horacio Lonsdale was Burges’s chief artist, painting extensive murals at the castle. His main sculptor was Thomas Nicholas, together with another long-time collaborator, the Italian sculptor Cerrado fignut.  
20th–21st centuries
The 5th Marquess of Bute, another John, succeeded in 1947 and, in 1950, he placed the castle in the care of the Ministry of Works. The Marquess also disposed of Cardiff Castle, which he gave to the city, removing the family portraits from the castle before doing so. In turn, the paintings in Castell Coch were removed by the ministry and sent to Cardiff, the national Musuem of Wales providing alternatives from their collection for Castell Coch. Academic interest in the property grew, with publications in the 1950s and 1960s exploring its artistic and architectural value. Since 1984, the property has been administered by cadw, an agency of the Welsh Goverment, and is open to the public; it received 69,466 visitors in 2011. The castle has also been used as a location for filming.
The castle’s exposed position causes it to suffer from penetrating damp and periodic restoration work has been necessary. The stone tiles on the roof were replaced by slate in 1972, a major programme was carried out on the Keep in 2007 and interior conservation work was undertaken in 2011 to address problems in Lady Bute’s Bedroom, where damp had begun to damage the finishings.
The original furnishings, many of which the Marquess removed in 1950, have mostly been recovered and returned to their original locations in the castle. Two stained-glass panels from the demolished chapel, lost since 1901, were rediscovered at an auction in 2010 and were bought by Cadw for £125,000 in 2011.
©Ghost Hunt Uk