Review of Castell Coch
Castle Road | Tongwynlais, Cardiff CF15 7JQ, Wales
44-292-081-0101
Certificate of Excellence
What is Certificate of Excellence?
TripAdvisor awards a Certificate of Excellence to accommodations, attractions and restaurants that consistently earn great reviews from travelers.
“Glorious”
Reviewed July 10, 2015
Sitting high above 'Tongwynlais' on a cliff, is the beautiful Castell Coch (red castle) reconstructed as a holiday home for the '3rd Marquess of Bute' who inherited it in 1848 'William Burges' was the architect employed for the task. Originally, ''Castell coch'' was built by the 'Normans' after 1081 which was abandoned shortly after, changing hands a few times until the re build starting in 1897. The castle is now in the hands of 'Cadw', the Welsh heritage agency...It is a lovely place to visit, with regular tours throughout the day! Stunning...
Visited July 2015
Ask sarah t about Castell Coch
This review is the subjective opinion of a TripAdvisor member and not of TripAdvisor LLC.
sarah t has 1 more review of Castell Coch
955 reviews from our community
Visitor rating
“A sight you must see!”
Reviewed July 8, 2015
If you've ever travelled along the M4, you will have noticed a red castle on a hill in the distance, surrounded by forest. When you realise that you're not dreaming, that this isn't a fairy tale and that you should be watching the road, you will realise that that castle does in fact exist and is Castell Coch (meaning Red Castle in Welsh). Its not a castle, but in fact a summer home that was rarely used. However, if you are visiting Wales and want to see an amazing castle look-alike, I highly recommend that you take a trip down to Castell Coch.
There is a fee, however you can get a discount if you're a student. My university friends and I managed to get in for only £5 with our proof of being students. This money also rightfully goes towards the protection and renovation of the building, so its going to a good cause. Its also very worth the price.
Note: When buying your admission, you will be given the option of having an audio tour. I'd highly recommend you take it. It gives out information about the building, and doesn't have to be used at all. It'll only talk if you want it to.
When you enter, you are given many options as to what you want to do. Unlike a lot of old buildings, there is no order as to what rooms you have to enter. You may enter any rooms as you please. Not much is kept from the public, so you can explore as much as you want. Each room of the castle is interesting, with its unique architecture. Coming back to the audio tours, you will be given a sort of brick with a speaker and the option to turn up or down the volume. Scattered around the castle will be devices. By putting your audio tour to the device and pressing the button, it will sense what room you are in and describe to you either something specific or the room itself. The tour can be very interesting, and I'd highly recommend it for any newcomers.
There are a few amenities as well. There is a gift shop that you can buy food, drinks and gifts from. There is also a tea room, that I was not lucky enough to experience.
I would recommend that you travel to Castell Coch by car as opposed to walking. You can catch the train to Taffs Wells from the valley line, however it will take you up to half an hour to walk there, and it involves a lot of uphill walking. Car is the most convenient way to get there.
Overall, I would highly recommend you travel to Castell Coch. There is a lot to explore and check out. You could go there to learn about the building, you could have a picnic outside the castle, or you could even just go for the hell of it. If you haven't been once, you have to go.
Visited May 2015