Top 10 Reasons to Spend a Summer Bank Holiday Weekend in Cardiff
by Aer Lingus on April 11th, 2015
0
Cardiff, the Welsh capital and its largest city, is steeped in over 2000 years of history, and is home to some of the UK’s most magical castles.
Thousands of visitors will descend on the city this year as their iconic national stadium hosts a selection of games for the Rugby World Cup.
If you’re not interested in watching any of the matches, there’s still plenty of other reasons to visit this beautiful city.
Here are some of our favourite things to do and see.
CARDIFF BAY
Cardiff Bay, Europe’s Largest Waterfront Development, is home to a number of attractions such as Techniquest Science Discovery Centre, Craft in the Bay, The Welsh Assembly at the Pierhead, and the Wales Millennium Centre.
Boat tours also operate daily, allowing you to soak in the atmosphere and view the beautiful scenery between Cardiff Bay and the City Centre.
DOCTOR WHO CARDIFF BUS TOUR
Not just for Doctor Who fans, this is a great way to see the Welsh capital and its surrounding areas including the Bay, the City Centre and Llandaff, where some of the most memorable scenes of Doctor Who were shot.
The tour also includes a look inside parts of Cardiff Castle that are not accessible to the general public.
MILLENNIUM STADIUM
The Millennium Stadium plays host to some crucial rugby games this year for the Rugby World Cup, including Ireland’s first game against Canada.
If you’re not lucky enough to get tickets to any matches there’s still plenty of opportunity to see the Welsh National Stadium, with tours taking place throughout the week.
SPILLERS RECORDS
Spillers, founded in 1894, is the oldest record store in the world.
Originally located in the Queen’s Arcade, the shop has moved three times and is now found in Cardiff’s Morgan Arcade.
They’ve a diverse selection of music on both CD and traditional vinyl, and are also the top vendor for tickets to alternative music gigs.
On your visit make sure to pick up one of their iconic Spillers Record t-shirts.
THE TAFF TRAIL
The Taff Trail is a popular path along the River Taff that runs for 55 miles from Roald Dahl Plass in Cardiff Bay to Brecon.
The trail takes advantage of the former Taff Vale Railway routes, towpaths, tramways and beautiful Glamorganshire Canal, allowing you to walk or cycle through 2000 acres of stunning parkland.
CARDIFF CASTLE
In the heart of the Welsh capital is the beautiful Cardiff Castle, a truly remarkable and historical site.
There’s plenty on offer here, including tours of their Wartime Shelters, Film Locations and the Cardiff Castle Ghost Tour.
For an alternative night out, you can also book a traditional Welsh Banquet and experience an evening of Welsh food, wine and music.
LLANERCH VINEYARD
Wales is fast developing a reputation for excellent wine production and is home to over 20 vineyards, scattered across its unique landscape.
Llanerch Vineyard is a luxury vineyard hotel, located just 20 minutes outside Cardiff in the tranquil Glamorganshire countryside.
They offer a wide range of activities including cooking demonstrations, afternoon tea and their annual grape harvest which takes place at the end of October.
ST FAGANS MUSEUM OF WELSH LIFE
St Fagans Museum of Welsh Life is one of Wales's most-visited heritage attractions located on the grounds of St Fagans Castle.
The site gives visitors an incredible insight into the rich heritage and culture of Wales, with workshops, galleries, exhibitions and traditional festivals celebrated throughout the year.
St Fagans explores all aspects of the Welsh people lived, worked and spent their leisure time.
BUTE NATIONAL PARK
One of the UK’s largest parks, Bute Park is 56 hectares of beautiful mature parkland within the heart of Cardiff’s city centre.
Some of Cardiff’s most popular cultural events take place in the park throughout the year including Cardiff RHS show, Sparks in the Park and Cardiff Mardi Grass.
Just a short walk from Cardiff Castle, the park is home to some of Cardiff’s most popular attractions including the Blackfriars Friary, Mill Leat, the Animal Wall and numerous walking trails.
CASTELL COCH
If you’re looking to escape the busy streets of Cardiff city there’s no better place than the magnificent Castell Coch.
The Gothic Revival castle was originally built above the village of Tongwynlais between 1267 and 1277, and then restored in the 19th century.
Castell Coch offers audio tours where you can experience its magical architecture and interior, and discover its vibrant history.