CASTELL COCH.
THE FOLLOWING IS A COPY OF A SHORT PAPER ON CASTELL
COCH READ BY MR JOHN STUART CORBETT, ON THE
OCCASION OF A VISIT OF MEMBERS OF THE CARDIFF
NATURALISTS' SOCIETY TO THE CASTLE, ON JUNE 27TH, 1917.
I have been asked to say something to you as to the history
of this Castle, and that is in one sense a simple, and in another
a most difficult matter, for practically nothing is known of its
history, and very little of its origin.
We are in the Red Castle in the Red Forest; the name of the
Castle, which it shares with several others in Wales, being no
doubt derived from the colour of the local stone of which it
was built, which, when the building was new, would have a
distinctly red appearance.
As to the Red Forest, by which
name the wood in which the Castle stands was known in
mediaeval times, it seems probable that it was derived from the
autumnal colour of the beech trees, of which the wood largely
consisted, in those days perhaps to a greater extent than at
present.
So far as I am aware, the Castle is not even mentioned in any
document of a date near the time of its building, and this is
curious, considering the numerous records (printed by the late
Mr. Clark in his Cartae") which exist with respect to the
disputes about the building of Caerphilly, and the fact that it
is almost certain that Castell Coch must have been built about
the same time, and by the same person, namely, Earl Gilbert
de Clare, who ruled in Glamorgan from 1262 to 1295.
Mr. Clark,
in his Mediaeval Military Architecture," expresses the view
that Castell Coch might be slightly earlier than Caerphilly,
but the two must have been so near in point of date that it would
hardly be possible to found any argument as to the order in
which they were built from the style of the architecture.
I here
refer to the earlier portion of Caerphilly built by Gilbert de
Clare.
In his Land of Morgan," Mr. Clark regards it as certain
that Castell Coch was the work of that Gilbert de Clare who
built Caerphilly, and at a somewhat later date, Morlais.
That he must have been the builder, and the approximate
date, can be proved with practical certainty from historical
facts known to us.
The Lordship of Senghenydd, in which both Castell Coch
and Caerphilly stand, was in the hands of Welsh Lords up to
the time of the above-mentioned Gilbert de Clare.
An extent or inquisition of Glamorgan, taken soon after the
death df his father, Earl Richard, in 1262, expressly mentions
that Griffith ap Rees held Senghenydd at that time, owing no
service but a heriot at death.
It was not until 1266 or early in 1267 that Gilbert, son of
Richard, captured and imprisoned this Griffith, who was last
Welsh Lord of Senghenydd, and seized the district into his own
hands.
Then followed the building of Caerphilly and the long
controversy with Llewelyn, Prince of Wales, to which this gave
rise, and which at last terminated by the death of Llewelyn
and the conquest of North Wales by Edward I.
This event,
and the end which it put to the fear of invasion from the
north down the Valley of the Taff, would much reduce the
importance of Castell Coch, and may be the reason why no men-
tion is made of it in the inquisitions on the deaths of Lords of
Glamorgan, with one exception, the inquisition taken in 1307
on the death of Joan, Countess of Gloucester, where Rubeum
Castrum is mentioned in a list of the members of Sen-
ghenydd.
Practically all we know about its origin is that it
was almost certainly built by Gilbert de Clare.
It could not be
earlier than his time, because he was the first Lord of Glamorgan
to possess Senghenydd.
What happened to it afterwards, we do not know.
There are
legends, referred to by Mr. Clark in his Mediaeval Military
Architecture," of its having been taken by the Welsh.
Such events might have happened in the great rising which
took place in 1295, the last year of de Clare's life, in the rising
of Llewelyn Bren in 1315, or in the wars of Owen Glyndwr.
In fact, there can scarcely be any doubt that if it was main-
tained as a fortress in Glyndwr's time it would fall into his
hands, as was the case with Caerphilly and Cardiff.
In his description of the Castle, as it was in its ruined con-
dition before the recent restoration, Mr. Clark says that two-
thirds of the circumference of the South tower had been blown
away by a mine.
If this is so, it followed that its destruction
took place after gunpowder had come into use, though at what
date we do not know.
It seems to me not improbable that it
may have been destroyed by Owen Glyndwr, like so many other
Castles in the neighbourhood.
At any rate, it was in ruins in Leland's time, for he writes
thus
Castelle Gogh standeth on a high Rok of a redde stone
or Soile a 2 Miles from Landaf upper on Taue a
quarter of a mile from the Est Ripe of Taue
Castelle Gough al in Ruine no bigge thing but high.
"It longith to the King and standeth by Keuen On.'
Rhys Myryke says of the Castle that it was supposed to be
built by Ivor Bach, which is of course quite impossible as
regards the Castle with which we are dealing.
If in fact Ivor had any fortress hereabouts, it must have
been some previous building either on or near the site of the
present Castle, or else perhaps what Mr. Clark calls the Cymric
Camp higher up.
What exactly that camp was I do not know.
It is marked on the Ordnance Map as remains of an entrench-
ment, but I am not aware whether it has ever been carefully
examined.
Ivor Bach was Lord of Senghenydd and ancestor of that
Griffith ap Rhys who was dispossessed by de Clare, and it may
well be true that he had some stronghold at or near the site of
the Castle.
Of that, however, nothing is certainly known.
What no doubt is true is that he surprised Cardiff Castle in
or about 1158 and took William, Earl of Gloucester, prisoner,
carrying him off to some fastness in the hills, which may or
may not have been near this place.
Mr. Clark in his work to which I have referred gives a very
careful and minute description of the ruins as they stood before
reconstruction, so far as he was able to investigate them, which
he describes as being a matter of some difficulty, owing to the
extent to which they were overgrown with brushwood.
I may
add that in a paragraph at the end of his notice, added after the
rebuilding, Mr. Clark says the restoration is very complete and
in strict accordance with what has been ascertained of the
original structure.