Apr
MAY
Jun
4
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
4 May 16 - 4 May 16
Close Help
Skip to content
Oliver Yn Caerdydd
Menu
Home
About
Castell Coch and St. David
March 18, 2016
March 18, 2016
~ oliverk1393
Hey again,
With my Easter break starting today at 10 AM after my last class of the week, I decided now was a good time to get back to taking short little day trips.
Today’s trip was a long overdue trip to Castell Coch, a small castle nestled in the hills north of Cardiff.
Destroyed and abandoned in the 14th century, the castle got a much needed makeover in the 1880’s.
The exterior architecture of the small retreat pushes the boundaries of medieval realism and draws fairly heavily on high fantasy.
Although it retains certain medieval affections like the arrow slits and hoardings over the windows, it lacks the grandeur and dignity of a true medieval castle.
However, it compensates with its romantic and fantastical style.
The castle interior is fully Victorian, and the only medieval authenticity it possesses is in the owner’s catholic decorations.
The castle’s owner, the Third Marquess of Bute, in rather eccentric fashion converted to Catholicism, and decorated his castles with catholic murals and artwork, rather unique in Victorian England.
Overall, a very picturesque excursion just a short ways away from Cardiff.
A couple other short happenings I’ve been able to fit in amongst my class schedule was a day at Cardiff Comic-con.
As with the London Comic-con earlier this school year, I didn’t really dress up, something I would like to do at a future con.
Still, it was fun to check out the wares, and see all the fantastic costumes people put together.
Then of course, we had Saint David’s day in Wales (on the first of March).
I went to a nice parade, and lots of daffodil’s (national flower of Wales) were distributed.
Unfortunately though Wales was not successful in rugby last weekend against England, getting stomped the first half to coming back 21 points to fall just four points short.
It was like watching the Seahawks vs Panther’s all over again unfortunately.
With Easter on its way, and a trip to Italy at the beginning of April, hopefully this blog will start getting busy again soon.
Share this:
Twitter
Facebook
Google
Like this:
Like Loading...
Related
Post navigation
< Previous Scotland: Caught Up
Next > Big Pit to Beaumaris
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
Search for:
Recent Posts
Last Day: Rome
Florence and the Uffizi
Siena
Castle and Cathedral’s
The Vatican
Recent Comments
Tanya on Castle and Cathedral’s
Jennifer on Scotland Day 3: Glasgow
Steven Chen on Week 1 in Wales
Archives
April 2016
March 2016
February 2016
January 2016
November 2015
October 2015
September 2015
Pics
Gerald of Wales
Saint Davis
Henry VII
Owain Glydwr
Blog at WordPress.com.
~ The Penscratch Theme .
Follow
Follow “Oliver Yn Caerdydd”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 494 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com
Post to
Cancel
%d bloggers like this: