Mar
APR
May
12
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
12 Apr 16 - 12 Apr 16
Close Help
About
Encyclopedia
Contact
Sign in / Register
Find
Nuffield College, Oxford
Nuffield College, Oxford
Help improve this article
Sourced from World Heritage Encyclopedia™ licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
Help to improve this article, make contributions at the Citational Source
Nuffield College, Oxford
Colleges and halls of the University of Oxford
Nuffield College
College name Nuffield College Named after William Morris, Lord Nuffield Established 1937 Sister college None Warden Sir Andrew Dilnot Undergraduates None Graduates 74 Location New Road and Worcester Street
Location of Nuffield College within central Oxford
Coordinates : 51°45′10″N 1°15′47″W﻿ / ﻿51.752834°N 1.262917°W﻿ / 51.752834; -1.262917
College website Blazon Ermine on a fesse or between in chief two roses gules barbed and seeded proper and in base a balance of the second three pears sable.
Nuffield College / ˈ n ʌ f iː l d / is one of the constituent colleges of the University of Oxford in England.
It is a graduate college and specialises in the social sciences, particularly economics, politics and sociology.
It is one of the newest colleges, having been founded in 1937, and one of the smallest with around 75 postgraduate students and 60 academic fellows .
Its architecture is designed to conform to the traditional college layout and its modernist spire is a landmark for those approaching Oxford from the west.
As of 2006, the college had an estimated financial endowment of £146m.
[1] This makes it the fourth richest Oxford college by assets.
[2]
Contents
1 History
2 Buildings
3 Research
4 People associated with Nuffield
4.1 Notable students and fellows
4.2 Wardens
5 Gallery
6 References
7 External links
History
Nuffield College was founded in 1937 after a donation to the University by the industrialist and the founder of Morris Motors Lord Nuffield .
On 16 November 1937 the university entered a Deed of Covenant and Trust with Lord Nuffield.
[3] He donated land for the college on New Road, to the west of the city centre near the mound of Oxford Castle , on the site of the largely disused basin of the Oxford Canal .
[4] As well as the land, Nuffield gave £900,000 [n 1] to build the college and to provide it with an endowment fund.
[3] [6] For the creation of Nuffield College and for his other donations he was described in 1949 by an editorial in The Times as "the greatest benefactor of the University since the Middle Ages".
[7]
From its inception, Nuffield College initiated a number of trends at both Oxford and Cambridge.
[2] It was the first college to have both women and men housed together.
It was also the first college to consist solely of graduate students.
In addition, it was the first in modern times to have a defined subject focus, namely, the social sciences.
Buildings
Nuffield is located on the site of the basin of the Oxford Canal to the west of Oxford .
The land on which the college stands was formerly the city's principal canal basin and coal wharfs.
The architect Austen Harrison , who had worked in Greece and Palestine, was appointed by the University to design the buildings.
His initial design, heavily influenced by Mediterranean architecture, was rejected by Nuffield, who called it "un-English" [6] and refused to allow his name to be associated with it.
Harrison reworked the plans, aiming for "something on the lines of Cotswold domestic architecture", [6] as Nuffield wanted.
The plans were approved by Lord Nuffield in 1940.
Construction of the college began in 1949, and was completed in 1960.
Restrictions on construction after the Second World War meant that work on the college was not completed until 1960.
The original plan for the college to occupy land on both sides of Worcester Street was scaled down as a result of budget and material shortages, and to this day the land to the west of the college is occupied by a "temporary" car park.
In one change, the tower, which had been planned to be ornamental, was redesigned to hold the college's library.
It was the first tower built in Oxford for 200 years and is about 150 feet (46 m) tall, including the flèche on top.
The buildings are arranged around two quadrangles , with residential accommodation for students and fellows in one, and the hall, library and administrative offices in the other.
The chapel has stained glass windows designed by John Piper .
The architectural aesthetic of the final design, particularly the tower and its fleche , has attracted some criticism; unlike the other "dreaming spires" of Oxford, Nuffield's tower is a masonry-clad steel-framed book-stack.
The architectural historian Sir Howard Colvin said that Harrison's first design was Oxford's "most notable architectural casualty of the 1930s"; [8] it has also been described as a "missed opportunity" to show that Oxford did not live "only in the past".
[9] Reaction to the architecture of the college has been largely unfavourable.
In the 1960s, it was described as "Oxford's biggest monument to barren reaction".
[10] The tower has been described as "ungainly", [11] and marred by repetitive windows.
The travel writer Jan Morris wrote that the college was "a hodge-podge from the start".
[12] However, the architectural historian Sir Nikolaus Pevsner , although unimpressed with most of the college, thought that the tower helped the Oxford skyline and predicted it would "one day be loved".
[13] The writer Simon Jenkins doubted Pevsner's prediction, and claimed that "vegetation" was the "best hope" for the tower – as well as the rest of the college.
[14]
Research
Around a third of Nuffield's fellows hold appointments at the University of Oxford as lecturers, readers or professors.
In addition, the college fully funds around a dozen "Official Fellowships", which the College views as tenured research professorships (although most also teach on the University's graduate programme), and about a dozen three year post-doctoral research fellows.
The college also houses a number of young scholars who hold distinguished awards, such as British Academy post-doctoral fellowships, some senior research fellows and a group of research-active emeritus and honorary fellows.
The collection also produces works in the Nuffield Election Studies.
The college has been the source of some of the major research developments in social science.
These include the British Election Studies and the major programme of research on Social Mobility in Britain.
It was the birthplace of the "Oxford School" of Industrial Relations ; it pioneered the development of cost benefit analysis for developing countries; and it has made a major contribution to the methodology of econometrics .
People associated with Nuffield
Notable students and fellows
Main article: List of Nuffield College people
Many prominent people have studied at Nuffield including; Mark Carney , Governor of the Bank of England , Manmohan Singh , Prime Minister of India, Geoffrey Gallop , former Premier of Western Australia and Nicholas Stern , economist and future President of the British Academy .
Visiting fellows include Stephanie Flanders , BBC economics editor, Tim Harford , author and economist,  and George Soros , investor and philanthropist.
Sir David Cox , eminent statistician, was Warden from 1988-94 and remains an Honorary Fellow.
Mark Carney
Manmohan Singh
Geoffrey Gallop
Error creating thumbnail: Invalid thumbnail parameters or image file with more than 12.5 million pixels
Nicholas Stern
Stephanie Flanders
Error creating thumbnail: Invalid thumbnail parameters or image file with more than 12.5 million pixels
Tim Harford
George Soros
Sir David Cox
Wardens
Sir Andrew Dilnot , 2012–present
Stephen Nickell , 2006–2012
Sir Anthony Atkinson , 1994–2006
Sir David Cox , 1988–94
Michael Brock, 1978–88
Sir Norman Chester, 1954–78
Alexander Loveday , 1949–54
Sir Henry Clay, 1945–49
Sir Harold Butler, 1938–45
Gallery
Aerial view showing Nuffield College and Castle Mound
The spire of Nuffield is prominent in the Oxford skyline
College buildings at the corner of New Road and Worcester Street
Nuffield College from the top of Castle Mound
Sculptures and a pond in the Quad
Windows of the lower quadrangle
The view from street level
The west gate
References
Notes
References
Bibliography
External links
Commons has media related to Nuffield College, Oxford .
Virtual Tour of Nuffield College
v
t
e
University of Oxford
Leadership
Chancellor
The Lord Patten of Barnes
Vice-Chancellor
Dr Andrew Hamilton
Registrar
Ewan McKendrick
List of Heads of Houses
All Souls
Balliol
Brasenose
Christ Church
Corpus Christi
Exeter
Green Templeton
Harris Manchester
Hertford
Jesus
Keble
Kellogg
Lady Margaret Hall
Linacre
Lincoln
Magdalen
Mansfield
Merton
New
Nuffield
Oriel
Pembroke
Queen's
St Anne's
St Antony's
St Catherine's
St Cross
St Edmund Hall
St Hilda's
St Hugh's
St John's
St Peter's
Somerville
Trinity
University
Wadham
Wolfson
Worcester
Permanent Private Halls
Blackfriars Hall
Campion Hall
Regent's Park College
St Benet's Hall
St Stephen's House
Wycliffe Hall
Departments
Humanities
American Institute
Classics
Drawing and Fine Art
History
Linguistics, Philology & Phonetics
Medieval and Modern Languages
Oriental Studies
Philosophy
Theology
etc.
Medical Sciences
Biochemistry
Human Genetics
Pathology
etc.
MPLS
Begbroke Science Park
Computer Science
Engineering Science
Materials
Mathematical Institute
Plant Sciences
etc.
Social Sciences
Business School
Continuing Education
Enterprise and the Environment
Government
International Development
Internet Institute
Martin School
Oxford-Man Institute
etc.
Recognised Independent
Centres
Buddhist Studies
Hebrew and Jewish Studies
Hindu Studies
Islamic Studies
Sport
Australian Rules Football
Boxing
Cricket
Cycling
Dancesport
Darts
Football
Gliding
Handball
Ice Hockey
Mountaineering
Polo
Rowing
Rugby
University of Oxford portal
Help improve this article
Sourced from World Heritage Encyclopedia™ licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
Help to improve this article, make contributions at the Citational Source
Categories
New Road, Oxford
David Cox (statistician) St John's College, Cambridge, Nuffield College, Oxford, University of Cambridge, Royal Aircraft Establishment, University of Leeds, Henry Daniels
William Morris, 1st Viscount Nuffield
University of Oxford Colleges of the University of Oxford, Oxford University Press, Bodleian Library, Permanent Private Hall, Oxford, Hertford College, Oxford
Oxford Great Western Railway, Cheltenham, Queen Street, Oxford, Headington, University College, Oxford, Oxford railway station
Suggestions
University of Oxford Colleges of the University of Oxford, Oxford University Press, Bodleian Library, Permanent Private Hall, Oxford, Hertford College, Oxford
Amartya Sen West Bengal, Harvard University, Welfare economics, Trinity College, Cambridge, Martha Nussbaum, University of Calcutta
Norman Tebbit Margaret Thatcher, Secretary of State for Employment, Epping (UK Parliament constituency), Chingford (UK Parliament constituency), Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Chairman o..
.
Duncan J. Watts Microsoft Research, New York City, Columbia University, Santa Fe Institute, University of New South Wales, Cornell University
St Antony's College, Oxford Margaret MacMillan, Antonin Besse, William Deakin, Bevington Road, Aden, Anthony the Great
Related Books
A Register of the Members of St. Mary Magdalen College, Oxford, From the Foundation of the College : Vol.
4 By: Magdalen College (University of Oxford)
A Register of the Members of St. Mary Magdalen College, Oxford, From the Foundation of the College : Vol.
8 By: Magdalen College (University of Oxford)
Oxford Historical Society : Publications : Volume 49 By: Oxford Historical Society.
Alumni Oxonienses; The Members of the University of Oxford, 1500-1714; Their Parentage, Birthplace, And Year of Birth, With a Record of Their Degrees By: University of Oxford; Foster, Joseph, 1844-1905
Alumni Oxonienses : The Members of the University of Oxford, 1715-1886; Their Parentage, Birthplace and Year of Birth, With a Record of Their Degrees.
Being the Matriculation Register of the University : Vol.
2 By: University of Oxford; Foster, Joseph, 1844-1905
This article was sourced from Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply.
World Heritage Encyclopedia content is assembled from numerous content providers, Open Access Publishing, and in compliance with The Fair Access to Science and Technology Research Act (FASTR), Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., Public Library of Science, The Encyclopedia of Life, Open Book Publishers (OBP), PubMed, U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health (NIH), U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, and USA.gov, which sources content from all federal, state, local, tribal, and territorial government publication portals (.
gov, .
mil, .
edu).
Funding for USA.gov and content contributors is made possible from the U.S. Congress, E-Government Act of 2002.
Crowd sourced content that is contributed to World Heritage Encyclopedia is peer reviewed and edited by our editorial staff to ensure quality scholarly research articles.
By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
World Heritage Encyclopedia is a registered trademark of the World Public Library Association, a non-profit organization.
2014 © World Heritage Encyclopedia.
All rights reserved.