Mar
APR
May
12
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
12 Apr 16 - 12 Apr 16
Close Help
Property Search
About Us
Services
Sectors
Scotland
Research
News & Media
Join Us
Contact Us
About Us
Our Offices
Our Firm
Our Board
Our People
Our History
Corporate Social Responsibility
Bidwells in the Community
Bidwells Alumni
A-Z Services
Cambridge Head Office
Aberdeen
Cambridge Stonecross – Residential
Chelmsford
Fort William
Inverness
London
Milton Keynes
Norwich
Oxford
Perth
St Albans
Trimley Estate Office
Services
Commercial
Business Space – Distribution & Industrial
Business Space – Office
Business Space – R & D
Consultancy & Valuation
Fund Management
Investment
Lease Consultancy
Leisure Agency
Occupier Consultancy
Property Management
Retail Agency
Student Accommodation
Residential
Residential Sales
New Homes
Residential Lettings
Residential Development
Rural
Rural Services Overview
Agribusiness
Agricultural Investment
Client Accounting Services
Compulsory Purchase
Farm Management
Forestry & Woodland Management
GIS Mapping
Horseracing & Equestrian
Land & Estate Management
Renewable Energy
Rural Development & Diversification
Rural Dispute Resolution & Landlord/Tenant Consultancy
Rural Estate & Farm Agency
Rural Valuation
Strategic Estate Planning
Professional Services
Architecture & Design
Building Surveying
Environmental Impact Assessments
Planning
Project Management
Urban Design Studio
Sectors
Agriculture & Rural
Commercial
Education
Financial
Food & Drink
Forestry
House Building
Leisure
Manufacturing
Non-Governmental Organisations
Professional Advisors
Public Sector
Residential
Retail
Join Us
Careers
Why Join?
Graduates and Placements
Partners and Professionals
Business Support Roles
Current Vacancies
My Bidwells Twitter LinkedIn YouTube
Home
/
News & Media
/
Announcements
/
Central Oxford Regeneration Scheme Announced
A Relatively Quiet Budget For Planners?
UK’s Largest Non-Residential Passivhaus Building
Trinity College Cambridge Breaks Ground On Pioneering John Bradfield Centre At Cambridge Science Park
Bidwells Named As Finalist In Three Categories For Prestigious 'Planning Oscars'
Central Oxford Regeneration Scheme Announced
Bidwells Expert Stands Up For Clients At HS2 Parliamentary Select Committee
Broxden Boost As Prominent Development Sites Now Available And Key Office Lettings Announced
Bidwells Raises £175,000 For Children's Charities
Winning 2016 Norfolk Farming Scholars Announced
Kings House Hotel Plans Reveal A Majestic Makeover
Central Oxford Regeneration Scheme Announced
Patrick McMahon,
Senior Partner
Contact me on:
01223 841841
Email: Click Here
PROFILE
9 February 2016
A major £200 million mixed-use scheme, which will breathe new life into the heart of Oxford, has moved a step closer following the purchase of key land in the Oxpens area and the signing of a historic joint venture between Nuffield College, Oxford and Oxford City Council.
Oxford City Council and Nuffield College have formed a joint venture company and acquired land from London and Continental Railways and Oxford City Council in the heart of Oxford's West End that will see a new neighbourhood created with hundreds of new homes, offices and possibly a hotel.
The acquisition ends years of uncertainty over the Oxpens area and complements Nuffield College’s acquisition of the Jam Factory and Island Site from Christ Church last year.
The Oxpens site is one of the largest development areas within the Oxford West End action area and lies almost opposite the new John Lewis, conveniently located between the new Westgate shopping centre and Oxford railway station.
The Council has stated that the Oxpens development is a strategic priority in the Oxford City Deal and the Oxfordshire Strategic Economic Plan, unlocking major private sector investment and jobs as well as delivering significant wider benefits.
The intention of the joint venture partners is to select a development partner to take the scheme forward during 2017 to coincide with the opening of the new Westgate in Autumn 2017.
Council leader Bob Price said previously there were plans to increase the proposed density of development at the Oxpens, to boost both the amount of potential office space and homes – including social housing and key worker properties.
Nuffield College Bursar Gwilym Hughes said: “We have made a real breakthrough and are very excited about these plans.
We see this site as playing a pivotal key role in addressing the lack of affordable housing for a wide range of people in Oxford.
“The regeneration of the West End will be of huge benefit to everyone and I cannot think of a groundbreaking approach like this that has been taken in Oxford before.
“Everyone realises you cannot do these schemes in isolation and we have now got to see how these sites could fit together.”
Mr Hughes said it was hoped academic buildings for the College and Oxford University in the West End could be combined with new homes, commercial and leisure buildings, in a bid to create a “cluster” for the social sciences and vibrant public spaces.
Bidwells and Minns Estates are advising Nuffield College, whilst JLL are advising Oxford City Council.
Listen to Patrick McMahon speaking to Estates Gazette here .
Back to Announcements
Share this page
Tweet
Market research
Spring 2016
Business Space Data Book Spring 2016
Winter 2015
Planning Commentary Autumn 2015
Autumn 2015
Agri-Investment Index Autumn 2015
More research from Bidwells
Blogs
March 2016
Reality Of Land Reform As Bill Is Passed
March 2016
A Locally Produced Agricultural Policy?
March 2016
Putting Off Succession Planning Until Tomorrow?
More from Bidwells Partner blogs
News
March 2016
Shaping Scotland's Digital Future
March 2016
A Relatively Quiet Budget For Planners?
March 2016
UK’s Largest Non-Residential Passivhaus Building
More news from Bidwells
© 2016 Bidwells LLP Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Terms of Use Legal Statements Site Map
Bidwells LLP, Bidwell House (HQ), Trumpington Road, Cambridge CB2 9LD.
Registered number: OC344553
Website hosted by Intelligent Mobile Ltd