FEB
APR
May
12
2015
2016
2017
5 captures
6 May 15 - 12 Apr 16
Close Help
Nuffield College Library's blog
Advice on using the library and researching the social sciences
Skip to content
Home
About
← Explore your archive week – 10th-16th November 2014
Christmas vacation opening hours 2014 →
From the archives – Nuffield College’s architecture
Posted on November 28, 2014 by Nuffield College Library
This post continues our series on the library’s archives and is accompanied by a display on the college’s architecture, which is currently available to view in the library.
In 1937, Lord Nuffield gave £900,000 and the site that Nuffield College now sits on to the University of Oxford so that a new college could be created.
In 1938, distinguished architect Austen Harrison was appointed and began to draw up plans.
The library holds in its archive, Nuffield College Papers , details on the appointment of Harrison to design Nuffield College, original plans, information on compromises and changes that had to be made, as well as an interview with the architect conducted by former warden Norman Chester.
Detailed plan of planting in beer garden (click to enlarge)
Interesting finds include a detailed plan for the layout of plants in the college beer garden and photographs of lightning damage to the roof in 1992.
Harrison’s original plans for the college were very Middle Eastern in their appearance but disliked by Lord Nuffield who is reported to have wanted something more in keeping with Oxford with “domes and pinnacles and things” (interview with Harrison, box A8, track 2 below ).
A more Cotswold-like plan was created after Harrison and his co-workers, Piers Hubbard and Thomas Barnes, took a cycle through the Cotswolds for inspiration.
Work continued once the second World War ended, although material had since become more expensive and the project had to become more economical.
Plans for a college building across the road where Worcester Street car park is now were abandoned, for example.
Earlier model with octagonal tower and buildings on, what is now, Worcester Street car park
Later model with tall tower and buildings on Worcester Street abandoned
Nuffield College Library was never originally supposed to be housed in the tower as it is now but in the additional building in Worcester Street car park that was never constructed.
However, financial constraints called a halt to construction and led to the decision that the library be housed in the tower.
Indeed, the tower was originally designed to be octagonal in shape rather than square.
It was thought that the shorter octagonal tower would be too low in relation to the castle mound opposite and a taller tower, that we see today, would “lift the College out of its sunken site on to the skyline of Oxford” (box A8/1/7).
The interview between Norman Chester and Austen Harrison conducted in 1970 is available below via SoundCloud, split into four tracks because of the original recording technique.
If you are interested in this material, contact the library at library-archives@nuffield.ox.ac.uk .
More information about the archives is available on the library website .
Recording of Norman Chester interviewing Austen Harrison
Back to top
Like this:
Like Loading...
Related
About Nuffield College Library
We are a social sciences library serving Nuffield College and the University of Oxford
View all posts by Nuffield College Library →
This entry was posted in Uncategorized and tagged archives , austen harrison , nuffield college .
Bookmark the permalink .
← Explore your archive week – 10th-16th November 2014
Christmas vacation opening hours 2014 →
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
Search for:
Watch this space!
Enter your email address to receive email notifications of our latest posts.
Nuffield Library links
1) Our homepage
2) LibraryThing
3) Delicious
4) Facebook
5) Twitter
Oxford Libraries' links
1) Oxford Libraries' catalogue
2) Online databases
3) E-journals
4) Oxford Research Archives
5) Social Science Library
Live Twitter feed
iSkills: @ OAOxford what's happening?
Briefing on #openaccess publishing and Oxford's position, Wed 20 April, bit.ly/1VPZce8 1 hour ago
Rethinking #socialmobility , John Goldthorpe research referenced by Graeme Atherton in @ LSEpoliticsblog , bit.ly/1ScPYJT 2 hours ago
Follow @NuffieldLibrary
Other blogs of interest
Second reading
Bodleian History Faculty Library at Oxford
Oxford Libraries Graduate Trainees
Law Bod Blog
US Studies Resources at Oxford
Oxford Scholarly Communications Debate
23 Things for Research
Gleanings & Memoranda: Conservative Party Archive
futureArch, or the future of archives...
BodWiser
Oxford University Career Resources
Categories
Archives
How to…
Library Services
News
Personalities
Research
Uncategorized
Get in touch
Nuffield College Library,
New Road,
Oxford
OX1 1NF
01865 278635
9.30-5.30, Monday to Friday
A.H. Halsey altmetrics analysis archives art articles austen harrison bodleian books Chelly cherwell citations copyright data databases DVDs e-books economics elections electronic resources First World War g.d.h. cole General Election 2015 google scholar government publications h index journals legal deposit library induction lord nuffield loveday map morris motors National Libraries Day National Poetry Day newspapers nuffield college official publications open access opening hours Oxford political party politics polls private conferences prizes propaganda reference management research scanning scopus scottish referendum social media social reconstruction survey social sciences sociology solo staff statistics surveys tour web of science
Social sciences links
Monthly Archive
November 2014
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
« Oct
Dec »
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
Nuffield College Library's blog
The Twenty Ten Theme .
Blog at WordPress.com.
Second reading
The House of Commons Library blog
Bodleian History Faculty Library at Oxford
A Bodleian Libraries blog
Oxford Libraries Graduate Trainees
Advice on using the library and researching the social sciences
Law Bod Blog
A Bodleian Libraries blog
US Studies Resources at Oxford
Advice on using the library and researching the social sciences
Oxford Scholarly Communications Debate
Advice on using the library and researching the social sciences
23 Things for Research
An online learning programme for researchers, students and staff at the University of Oxford
Gleanings & Memoranda: Conservative Party Archive
Advice on using the library and researching the social sciences
futureArch, or the future of archives...
Advice on using the library and researching the social sciences
BodWiser
Information resources, tools and skills for your research and learning
Oxford University Career Resources
Follow
Follow “Nuffield College Library's blog”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Build a website with WordPress.com
%d bloggers like this: