Feb
MAR
Apr
22
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
22 Mar 16 - 22 Mar 16
Close Help
Menu
Profile
Sign In
Create Account
| Facebook
Landing Pages
Home
Questions
Galleries
Quizzes
Categories
ChaCha
Anonymous
Why did Eisenhower oppose The Bricker Amendment?
Topics: Politics
Answer
These amendments would have placed restrictions on the scope and ratification of treaties and executive agreements entered into by the United States and are named for their sponsor, and that is why Eisenhower opposed them.
!
0
11 months ago
Do you know the answer?
Login or Sign Up to answer this question.
Related Politics Questions
What was the Bricker Amendment?
If adopted, the Bricker Amendment would have made the President seek congressional...
Who opposed the first 10 amendments?
Madison and Thomas Jefferson were both adamantly opposed to the 1st 10 amendments.
Did the Bricker Amendment pass Congress?
The Bricker Amendment is the collective name of a series of proposed amendments to...
What were the constitutional amendments passed during Eisenhower's presidency?
Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower (October 14, 1890 - March 28, 1969) was the 34th...
Where there any amendments passed during Dwight eisenhowers term?
The 23 Amendment to the Constitution, which permits citizens in the District of...
See All Questions▶
Last Week's Popular Questions for Politics
What is Bill Clinton, Hillary Clinton and Obama's IQ's
Actually those rumored IQ scores are incorrect.
IQ Score is directly related to...
What effect did changes in manufacturing, transportation, and communication have on the lives of individual Americans between 1820 and 1850 ?
From 1820 and 1850, Steam power changed manufacturing, and transportation.
The...
Students should respond to the following question by using race.
What is one advantage and one disadvantage of using social media at school?
Social media is an effective way to increase minority and other student's...
What is the law of supply ?
The principal of the law is that if demand is held constant, an increase in supply...
Who or what said “ I evolved from the king’s advisory council into England’s bicameral legislature? ”
The bicameral legislature in England is known as Parliament, and it consists of...
See All Questions▶
Ask us Anything
Related Politics Galleries
Wackiest Political Candidates of All Time
Politics isn't always boring.
Check out the wackiest politicians of all time!
Everything You Need to Know About President Obama
How much do you know about the United States President?
Check out these interesting fun facts!
What Are Some Odd Politician Hobbies?
Barack Obama, Paul Ryan and Teddy Roosevelt all have unusual hobbies.
See what these government men do for fun!
How to Land a Job in a Recession
Your survival guide for finding a job.
Related Politics Quizzes
Political Fact or Fiction?
PolitiFact has been keeping track of false statements made by this year's presidential hopefuls.
Do you know fact from fiction?
Mitt Romney on the Issues
GOP candidate Mitt Romney remains a frontrunner in 2012 race.
Take this quiz to see if you know where he stands on vital issues!
Would You Be A Good Criminal Defense Lawyer?
Becoming a good criminal defense lawyer takes more than people think.
Can you defend the worst of the worse?
Do You Really Understand Obamacare?
How well do you really understand the topic of Obamacare?
Take this quiz to test your knowledge!
ChaCha Apps
Homework Hero
iPhone / iPad
ChaCha
iPhone / iPad
Android
Connect with ChaCha
ChaCha Information
About
Advertising Policy
Affiliates
Become a Guide
Contact
Copyright
FAQs
Patents
Privacy
Terms of Use
© Copyright 2006-
ChaCha Search, Inc. – Experimental Use, All Rights Reserved, May Be Covered by US or Foreign Patents or Patents Pending.
Sign In To Your ChaCha Account
Email:
Password:
Remember Me
Sign In
Forgot Password?
Sign Up for a ChaCha Account
Sign up for ChaCha and you'll be able to easily get answers from thousands of ChaCha Guides on the Web and on your mobile phone, see your answer history, and stay up to date with the latest updates from ChaCha.
First Name:
Last Name:
Email:
Password:
Verify Password:
Create Account