SEP
MAR
Apr
22
2015
2016
2017
3 captures
6 Sep 15 - 22 Mar 16
Close Help
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
John W. Bricker
Article
Web sites
American politician
Written by: The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica
SHARE
Read
View History
Edit
Feedback
Alternative title: John William Bricker
John W. Bricker
American politician
Also known as
John William Bricker
born
September 6, 1893
Madison , Ohio
died
March 22, 1986
Columbus , Ohio
John W. Bricker, in full John William Bricker (born Sept. 6, 1893, Madison county, Ohio , U.S.—died March 22, 1986, Columbus , Ohio), conservative Republican politician who held state and national public offices for many years; he was the unsuccessful candidate for vice president of the United States in 1944.
After graduation from Ohio State University in 1916 and admission to the Ohio bar in 1917, Bricker served as a World War I army officer before entering Ohio politics. His terms as assistant attorney general (1923–27) and attorney general (1933–37) were followed by election to the governorship in 1938. Reelected twice, he became the first Republican to serve three consecutive terms. When New York’s Governor Thomas E. Dewey was nominated for president in 1944, Bricker was chosen to run for vice president. He represented the views of big business in domestic affairs and provincialism in international matters. The Republicans were defeated at the polls that fall.
In 1946 Bricker was elected to the U.S. Senate , serving from 1947 to 1959. In Congress he led his colleagues in efforts to curb the power of the president in foreign affairs. In 1953 he sponsored a constitutional amendment that came to be known as the Bricker Amendment . In its original form this proposal would have eliminated much of the automatic incorporation of conventional international law into the national law of the United States, leaving it to the political discretion of Congress or the state legislatures to decide upon the internal enforceability of the international obligations of the United States. Such a change would make it likely that the United States would often fail to observe its obligations under international law, thus restoring the critical situation that existed in this regard under the Articles of Confederation of the 18th century. Ultimately defeated, the Bricker Amendment was greatly attenuated during the debate by elimination of the restriction upon the enforcement of formal treaties. The George Resolution, finally voted on, provided that treaties and other international agreements must not conflict with the Constitution, that votes on treaty ratification in the Senate must be determined by yeas and nays, and that “executive agreements” shall not become effective as internal law except by act of Congress. This proposal failed by only one vote to receive the necessary two-thirds vote in the Senate.
In 1959 Bricker returned to Columbus, Ohio, to resume the practice of law.
Comments
Share
SHARE
Email
Print
Cite
You may also be interested in...
Abraham Lincoln
Charles Evans Hughes
Salmon P. Chase
Arlen Specter
John Wesley Dean III
Kenneth W. Starr
Edward Brooke
John Bowden Connally, Jr.
Elizabeth Dole
Harry Micajah Daugherty
David Davis
Richard Theodore Greener
Keep exploring
USA Facts
Structures of Government: Fact or Fiction?
Countries of the World
Writing Tips from 7 Acclaimed Authors
9 Nineties Babies with Britannica Bios
What made you want to look up John W. Bricker?
To
From
Subject
Comments
(Please limit to 900 characters)
Cancel
Britannica Stories
In The News / Society
Obama’s Historic Cuba Visit
Demystified / Pop Culture
Will We Ever Run Out of Sudoku Puzzles?
Spotlight / Philosophy & Religion
Holy Week
See All Stories
BRITANNICA QUIZZES
Ovechkin or Putin?
Ecosystems
Classic American Comic Strips
See More Quizzes
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
©2016 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Citations
MLA style:
"John W. Bricker". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016. Web. 22 Mär. 2016
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/John-W-Bricker>.
APA style:
John W. Bricker. (2016). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/biography/John-W-Bricker
Harvard style:
John W. Bricker. 2016. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Retrieved 22 März, 2016, from http://www.britannica.com/biography/John-W-Bricker
Chicago Manual of Style:
Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "John W. Bricker", accessed März 22, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/biography/John-W-Bricker.
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Update
Link
Click anywhere inside the article to add text or insert superscripts, subscripts, and special characters.
You can also highlight a section and use the tools in this bar to modify existing content:
Add links to related Britannica articles!
You can double-click any word or highlight a word or phrase in the text below and then select an article from the search box.
Or, simply highlight a word or phrase in the article, then enter the article name or term you'd like to link to in the search box below, and select from the list of results.
Note: we do not allow links to external resources in editor.
Please click the Web sites link for this article to add citations for
external Web sites.
Editing Tools:
Tips for Editing
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles.
You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind:
Encyclopaedia Britannica articles are written in a neutral, objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
MEDIA FOR:
John W. Bricker
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email. Try again later.
Or click Continue to submit anonymously:
Continue