ETTY WILLIAM BRITOMART REDEEMS FAIRE AMORET ARTIST PAINTING OIL CANVAS REPRO 48x36inch MUSEUM QUALITY
£351.50
Usually dispatched within 3 to 5 weeks.
Estimated delivery 11 - 28 May to the United States when you choose Standard at checkout. Details
Go
Dispatched from and sold by Elite-Paintings .
Size:
Unique 100% handmade oil paintings made for each customer
Size: 48x36inch / 120x90cm
Elite-Paintings. Best compromise Price and Quality. Only high and museum quality paintings
Choose between 3 sizes and 2 quality. Frame service available
for the painting stretched purchase the product stretched120x90cm
Add to Basket
£351.50 Usually dispatched within 3 to 5 weeks. Dispatched from and sold by Elite-Paintings .
Special Offers and Product Promotions
Size: 48x36inch | Material Type: Museum Quality
Customers Viewing This Page May Be Interested In These Sponsored Links
Size: 48x36inch | Material Type: Museum Quality
Technical Details
Visit the Delivery Destinations Help page to see where this item can be delivered.
Date First Available
Product Description
Size:48x36inch  |  Material Type:Museum Quality
Etty William Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret , Beautiful reproduction of the artist William Etty. High quality oil painting on canvas (rolled in a tube) "a painting gives style to your surroundings!"
Dear friend of art, thanks for entering in any of our listings! Our passion for art, has allowed us to create a network of hundreds of European artists specializing in the reproduction of artwork, through which, in our storeyou will find thousands of paintings,100% handcrafted, oil on canvas handmade . In addition, modern paintings and a full service to complete the artwork stretched and framed.
As art lovers,our reproductions are created only in high quality and museum quality, with extreme attention to details and quality materials that do not change in the course of time, the artwork that you buy here, has a value of 2-3 times higher than if purchased in a good art gallery, thanks to the reduced costs of selling online.
Why buy from us?