MAR
APR
May
4
2015
2016
2017
2 captures
3 Mar 16 - 4 Apr 16
Close Help
[ Skip to content ]          [ Skip to main navigation ]                  [ Skip to quick links ]         [ Go to accessibility information ]
Art UK is the successor to Your Paintings. It is a joint initiative between the Public Catalogue Foundation (now known as Art UK), 3,000 museums and other art collections, and the BBC.
By using this website you are agreeing to the use of cookies. Please read our Use of Cookies policy.
Close
Menu
SIGN IN
Donate
Main menu
Close
Home
Search form
Search
Discover
Artworks
Artists
Stories
Topics
Participate
Tag artworks
Become an Art Detective
Visit
Venues
What's on
Donate
How to donate
Why donate
Our funding
About
Welcome
Blog
Organisation
Image use
Further information
Subscribe to newsletter
Supporters and Partners
Benefactors and donors
Partner collections
Story contributors
Project partners
Shop
Books
Sign in
Register
Email address
Password
Remember me (uncheck on a public computer)
By signing up you agree to terms and conditions
Forgotten password?
Enter your email address below and we’ll send you a link to reset your password
Email address
Cancel
First name
Surname
Email address
Password
I agree to the Art UK terms and conditions
My details can be shared with selected Art UK Partners
Sign up to the Art UK newsletter
Art UK
Stories
Christopher Wright on Lord Leverhulme and his humorous Stubbs
Posted 26 Mar 2014, by Christopher Wright
The Farmer's Wife and the Raven
1782
George Stubbs (1724–1806)
The Lady Lever Art Gallery at Port Sunlight is sometimes difficult to find. Every time I have taken a taxi from Liverpool’s Lime Street station it has got lost. The metro station for the Gallery is called Bebington and New Ferry (one must not get out at Port Sunlight). But once located the Gallery is worth more than a brief visit.
Lord Leverhulme, the founder, left more pictures than are now in the Gallery as many works were later sold. William Etty’s Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret is in the Tate, Edward Burne-Jones’s Cupid Delivering Psyche is at Sheffield and Rubens’ Feast of Herod is at Edinburgh.
There is an inherent seriousness about the Leverhulme Collection which contains, amongst other things, eighteenth-century English furniture, antique and Neoclassical sculpture, medieval Spanish paintings, Old Master drawings and much more. The appearance of humour causes not a little surprise. It is certainly rare enough in eighteenth-century British painting. George Morland's (1763–1804) The Artist in His Studio and His Man Gibbs, cooking sausages, at Nottingham City Museums and Art Galleries manages it, but George Stubbs (1724–1806), the horse painter, surely not. But there it is, Stubbs’s The Farmer’s Wife and the Raven. Almost all Stubbs’s work is matter of fact. Just occasionally a little dog might be about to snap at a big horse’s heel or a groom might look a little cheeky, but here is an amusing calamity with a basket of eggs on the way to market. The still brilliant colour and its freshness is due to the fact that it is painted in enamel colours in a plaque of Wedgewood porcelain. It cocks a snook at Lord Leighton’s (1830–1896) The Daphnephoria, and makes John Everett Millais’s (1829–1896) A Flood look slightly silly.
Lord Leverhulme’s taste went further than his reputation as a soap millionaire.      
Christopher Wright, Art UK Advisor, Art Historian, Artist & Author of numerous catalogues of Old Master paintings in Britain
Share this page
Share on Facebook
Share on Twitter
Artworks
The Farmer's Wife and the Raven
1782
George Stubbs (1724–1806)
Follow us
Top
Subscribe to newsletter
Donate to Art UK
Quick links
Books
Contact
FAQ
Terms of use
Privacy policy
Use of cookies
Copyright notice
Disclaimer
Accessibility
Website credits
Supported by
Arts Council
® is a registered trade mark of the Public Catalogue Foundation.
Art UK is the operating name of the Public Catalogue Foundation, a charity registered in England and Wales (1096185).
Help us improve Art UK
Please tell us why you have visited Art UK today and what you think of it.
Take our 3 minute survey and you could win a £75 high street voucher.
Start survey
No thanks