Mar
APR
May
4
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
4 Apr 16 - 4 Apr 16
Close Help
Use the mouse to move the image and the mouse wheel to zoom in or out of the image.
You can also use the icons at bottom right (note that the icons will appear when hovering over the image):
Zoom in to the image
Zoom out of the image
Center the image
Toggle full page
Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret - William Etty (Exh.
R.A. 1833)
Oil on canvas, 90.8 x 66 cm
Tate: Purchased 1958
Taken from Edmund Spenser's The Faerie Queene (1590), Etty depicts the release of Amoret from the clutches of the evil sorcerer Busirane, by the heroic female knight Britomart.
Having fought her way through a wall of fire to reach the 'forbidden chamber', Etty shows Britomart coming to Amoret's rescue, wielding her sword, on the point of killing Busirane.
Amoret is bound in chains to a gold-embossed column, decorated in relief with scenes from the battles of Venus.
Reviewers almost universally approved of the painting.
The work was described as having a 'poetical character' and being a 'gem' within Etty's oeuvre (1).
Reviewing the work for The Literary Gazette the arts commentator declared that the 'grace and beauty of the female form, spirited action in the knight, and fiend-like expression in the magician, unite with the splendid depth of effect produced by the architecture' (2).
The critic for the New Monthly Magazine claimed it to be a 'wondrous and rare piece of colour', whilst, in acknowledgement of the painting's small size, the commentator for The Gentleman's Magazine described it to be a 'beautiful cabinet picture' (3).
The naked and bound figure of Amoret did not raise any eyebrows, nor were commentators perturbed by the suggestion of sadistic torture and occult sexual sorcery.
(1) Anon., 'Royal Academy', The Literary Gazette, 851, (1 May, 1833), p. 299.
(2) Ibid.
(3) Anon., 'Fine Arts', New Monthly Magazine and Literary Journal, 38:150, (June, 1833), p. 235.
Anon., 'Royal Academy', The Gentleman's Magazine, (May, 1833), p. 445.
Some images are restricted to University of York users.
If you are a University of York                     user, please login to see all the images (note that you only have to do this once).
Department of History of Art  |   Contact us  |   Credits  |   Cookies