APA
"ACCC V Baxter Healthcare - Derivative Crown Immunity Confined.(Australian Competition and Consumer Commission)(Case overview)." Mondaq Business Briefing. Mondaq Ltd. 2007. Retrieved March 17, 2016 from HighBeam Research: https://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-168214459.html
Please use HighBeam citations as a starting point only.  Not all required citation information is available for every article, and citation requirements change over time.
ACCC V Baxter Healthcare - Derivative Crown Immunity Confined.(Australian Competition and Consumer Commission)(Case overview)
Browse back issues of this publication by date
August 31, 2007 | Copyright
COPYRIGHT 2009 Mondaq Ltd. This material is published under license from the publisher through the Gale Group, Farmington Hills, Michigan. All inquiries regarding rights or concerns about this content should be directed to Customer Service .
Create a link to this page
Copy and paste this link tag into your Web page or blog:
<a href="https://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-168214459.html" title="ACCC V Baxter Healthcare - Derivative Crown Immunity Confined.(Australian Competition and Consumer Commission)(Case overview) | HighBeam Research">ACCC V Baxter Healthcare - Derivative Crown Immunity Confined.(Australian Competition and Consumer Commission)(Case overview)</a>
Yesterday, the High Court handed down its decision in the case of  Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Baxter Healthcare Pty  Limited & Others [2007] HCA 38. The decision is of particular  interest to departments and agencies engaged in procurement, and  businesses dealing with government. It is a timely reminder about the  value of competitive procurement processes.
This special Alert discusses the implications that arise for  government and business as a consequence of the Court's decision to  qualify the doctrine of derivative Crown immunity and apply Part IV of  the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth).
On 29 August 2007, the High Court held that Baxter Healthcare Pty  Limited (Baxter) was bound by sections 46 and 47 of the Trade Practices  Act - even when dealing with government entities which were not bound by  the Act. As a result, the question of breach has been remitted to the  Full Federal Court.
In reaching its conclusion the High Court held that an earlier  decision of Bradken Consolidated Ltd v Broken Hill Co Ltd (1979) CLR 107  (Bradken) was no longer authoritative law on the doctrine of derivative  Crown immunity.
Factual background
At first instance it was held that Baxter would have breached  sections 46 (misuse of market power) and 47 (exclusive dealing) of the  Trade Practices Act had it not been protected by the doctrine of  derivative Crown immunity. The appeal did not require the Court to  decide whether contracts between Baxter and the relevant government  authorities were enforceable.
At the time of the alleged breaches Baxter was, for all practical  purposes, the sole supplier of high volume, low value, sterile fluids in  Australia. These fluids are an essential item for every hospital in  Australia. Baxter also supplied low volume, high value products with  very specialised uses (such as peritoneal dialysis) - but there were  rival companies seeking to supply competing products.
Between 1998 and 2001, Baxter responded to a series of tenders  called by State and Territory health purchasing authorities, typically  offering to supply its products on the following alternate bases. …