[2005] FCA 581 (16 May 2005) (first instance)
[2006] FCAFC 128 (24 August 2006) (on derivative immunity)
[2007] HCA 38 (29 August 2007) (on derivative immunity)
[2008] FCAFC 141 (11 August 2008) (on sections 46 and 47)
[2010] FCA 929 (26 August 2010)               (on penalties)
Case links | Further reading
Overview
This case involved supply by Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd to a number of State  purchasing authorities of sterile fluids used for dialysis treatment. Baxter manufactures and supplies intravenous (IV)  solutions, peritoneal dialysis (PD) fluids and parenteral nutrition (PN)  products. It has an effective monopoly in relation to sterile fluids but faced real competition in relation to PD fluids. During the relevant time Baxter tendered for the supply of sterile and PD fluids to State Purchasing Authorities (SPA's). If offered products either as (prohibitively) high item-by-item prices or 'bundled' at significantly lower prices. The 'bundled' price was only available on condition Baxter was the sole supplier of both sterile and PD fluids to the SPA's.
Allegation
The ACCC alleged that Baxter had contravened the exclusive  dealing and misuse of market power provisions of the Act by using the market power it enjoyed in relation to sterile fluids to effectively compel the SPAs to enter into exclusive supply contracts including the PD products
Application of the Act (derivative Crown immunity)
It was conceded by the ACCC that the SPAs were not ‘carrying on a business’ for purposes of the Act and  therefore had Crown immunity from Part IV.   The issue then became whether Baxter benefited from ‘derivative’ Crown  immunity in its dealings with these authorities.  At first instance and on appeal to the Full  Court, it was held that they did benefit from derivative immunity (based on the earlier High Court decision in Bradken v Broken  Hill Proprietary Co Ltd (1979) 145 CLR 107 ).  The majority of the High Court held that parties did not benefit from  derivative Crown immunity when dealing with Crown authorities.
Exclusive dealing
The majority of the Full Federal Court held that Baxter had contravened s 47; in particular, it had the purpose and effect of substantially lessening competition.
Misuse of market power
The Full Court unanimously held that Baxter had substantial market power in relation to sterile fluids and that it had taken advantage of this power. The majority (Dowsett J dissenting) also held that Baxter had a prohibited purpose (s 46(1)(c)) and therefore contravened s 46.
Overview of the various decisions
The ACCC appealed to the Full Federal Court .
The Court dismissed the appeal, agreeing with the Primary Judge that Baxter benefited from derivative Crown immunity. The Court did not consider the other grounds of appeal (the ss 46 and 47 claims)
The ACCC appealed to the High Court on the issue of immunity
The majority of the High Court (Justice Callinan dissenting) upheld the appeal, finding Baxter did not benefit from derivative Crown immunity. They remitted the matter to the Full Federal Court to consider the ss 46 and 47 claims.
The Full Federal Court then considered the ss 46 and 47 claims
On misuse of market power the Court unanimously held that Baxter had substantial market power and had taken advantage of this power. The majority (Dowsett J dissenting) also held that Baxter had a prohibited purpose (s 46(1)(c)) and therefore contravened s 46.
On exclusive dealing the majority (Dowsett J dissenting) found that the various 'bundled' contracts contravened s 47; in particular, they had the purpose and effect or likely effect of substantially lessening competition
The issue of penalties was subsequently considered by Justice Mansfield . His Honour ordered pecuniary penalties totaling $4.9million against Baxter as well as imposing cost orders.
 
Federal Court (First Instance; Justice Allsop)
Justice Allsop held that Baxter benefited from derivative Crown immunity and that, as a result, the Act did not apply to their conduct.
Justice Allsop did consider the position in the event the Act did apply and concluded that there would have been one contravention of s 46 and a number of contraventions of s 47 if the Act applied.
Misuse or market power
[591] The item-by-item prices were not intended to be accepted.
His Honour concluded:
[594] Set in the context of the history of the various tenders, I cannot  conclude that in respect of any of the bids (leaving aside  Offer 1A in SA) there  was a relevant taking advantage.  The tender structures either permitted, or in  some cases expressly encouraged,  exclusive supply tenders over all products.
[595] When one appreciates that there was no attempt to analyse the  item-by-item prices by reference to costs (by either Baxter or the  ACCC), or by  reference to what might be a monopoly pricing or otherwise, beyond the  difference between the bundled prices and the  item-by-item prices, it is  difficult to draw specific and particular conclusions about the item-by-item  costs.  Against a background  of some evidence of the low margins for sterile  fluids, it is therefore difficult to conclude that those prices could not have  been  offered as an alternative in circumstances where Baxter did not have a  substantial degree of power in the sterile fluid market prices.
[596] Offer 1A in the SA bid is more problematic.  It was an isolated event in  dealing with one buyer in the national PD market.  If  Mr Browne had had any  real concern about there being workable competition in the sterile fluids market  at that time in SA I do not  think that he would have displayed what was a fairly  high-handed approach.  ... he would not have so acted  if he had not had the  confidence that he undoubtedly did have in Baxter’s position in the  sterile fluids market at that time  in SA.
[597] I am prepared to conclude that that point blank refusal to give a  discount for volume in Offer 1A on sterile fluids was a taking  advantage by  Baxter of its substantial degree of market power.
His Honour therefore concluded that there was a taking advantage in respect of one bid only.
Purpose
The relevant purposes alleged in this case involved eliminating or substantially damaging a competitor in the sterile fluids or PD market (s 46(1)(a)) and deterring or preventing a person engaging in competitive conduct in the sterile fluids or PD market (s 46(1)(c))
His Honour noted that purpose was the 'subjective purpose viewed in the context of all the surrounding circumstances' [para 601; emphasis added]
His Honour accepted that there was 'clear and defensible reason for the otherwise commercially understandable desire to obtain as much business as possible and to maintain maximum throughput through the plant' [para 602] but also observed that:
[605] It should be recognised that one could have the benign aim of maximising  throughput, by having a purpose (by way of a substantial  purpose as one of the  purposes: s 4F(1)(b) of the Act) found in s 46(1)(a) and (c). That is, there  may be a finding that a party had a proscribed s 46(1) purpose as the means of  ensuring the "legitimate" commercial aim of having a vulnerable factory maximise  its throughput and lower  its marginal costs.
Applied here:
[606] The Baxter documents ...  reflected a recognition at the senior corporate level in Baxter ... that Baxter was employing a technique or strategy of 'bundling' or  'leveraging' of dialysis products with sterile  fluids, in part because it was  being permitted, or tacitly encouraged, to do so.  It seems to me tolerably  plain that ... Baxter ... recognised that by tying or bundling PD to sterile fluids in the context of a  credibly framed  item-by-item alternative the consequence would be to make the  bids of competitors in respect of PD ... unlikely to  be acceptable.  One does not need the sophistication of the analysis of  [economic experts] to appreciate  the significant additional  cost of the item-by-item approach as the price of taking a competitor’s PD  products.  ... That  consequence was plainly appreciated by the SPAs and intended by  Baxter.
[608] Thus, it seems to me clear that the purpose involved, as a substantial  purpose, was to frame a bid structure involving a credible  item-by-item  alternative to maximise the chances of bringing about circumstances in which the  bids of competitors with substantially  equivalent products could only be  accepted at a significant cost penalty.
...
[609] This was not a purpose within s 46(1)(a).
[610] Whether or not this is a purpose within s 46(1)(c) is more problematic.   If s 46(1)(c) is directed to deterring or preventing Fresenius or Gambro or  anyone else from engaging in conduct at any time in the PD market,  I do not  think Mr Lee or anyone else at Baxter had such a purpose.  Fresenius and  Gambro ... were large  worldwide concerns.  Just as  Baxter did not have a purpose to damage or eliminate them, it did not have a  purpose to deter or prevent  them from trying to gain sales in Australia by  undertaking conduct in Australia, such as by submitting competing tenders.   Baxter’s  purpose was to bid in such a way as would prevent rival bids in  the PD market being "competitive", that is likely to succeed over  Baxter’s  bid.  The purpose in so constructing the bids in question was, it seems to me,  plainly to meet the developing competition  for PD fluids in Australia from  Fresenius and Gambro. That the approach was encouraged or tacitly or expressly  approved by the SPAs  is not to the point.  Baxter could have structured its bids  otherwise.  It did not.  It offered a tie or bundle at, largely, historical  prices, and a credible threat of an alternative with much higher prices. The  purpose was to make rival PD bids uncompetitive in  the sense of unacceptable,  because of the credible cost alternative of Baxter’s item-by-item  offer. [emphasis added]
[611] I have no doubt that that was the purpose (in the sense of a substantial  purpose) of Baxter.  The question is whether that satisfies s 46(1)(c).
[612] The notion of 'competitive conduct' should be understood in a practical  business sense conformable with the subject, scope and  purpose of the  legislation, including the objects stated in s 2 ... This involves the welfare and protection of consumers  through the preservation of the competitive process: ...
[613] The proposition put forward by Baxter is that the purpose of Baxter was  not directed to the competitive process in that Baxter’s  purpose was not  to deter or prevent Fresenius or Gambro from engaging in conduct in Australia .....  Expressed at that level of generality, I agree.   However, the competitive  process involves not merely the existence of an ability  to put forward a rival offer, it involves the existence of circumstances  which  make it likely or, at the very least, feasible, that the rival offer might be  successful and so might compete in a real and  practical sense. The phrase  'competitive conduct' can be taken to mean conduct that is competitive in a real  and not nominal sense:   here, not just the ability to submit paper that can be  seen to be a bid of a rival, but that bid having some prospect of success,  of  being 'competitive'.  Looked at in that way I have no doubt that ... the ... senior executives concerned at  Baxter, and thus  Baxter, had a substantial purpose in structuring the bids in a way to prevent  rival bidders (Fresenius and Gambro) for PD products from being able to put  forward bids that were realistically competitive by the existence of credible  alternative  high item-by-item pricing.  In the tender bidding system prevailing,  albeit structured and dictated by the buyers (the SPAs), the  purpose was to  create circumstances in which Fresenius and Gambro could not put forward  realistically competitive bids and so prevent  them engaging in conduct that was,  in a real sense, competitive.  True the act of Baxter did not impinge directly  on Gambro or Fresenius  doing anything.  Rather, it was directed to affecting the  environment in which their actions (their bids) would be judged.  Bearing  in  mind the aim and purpose of the legislation that, it seems to me, is to prevent  Fresenius and Gambro from engaging in relevant  conduct, because of the  controlling or focal role for the adjective 'competitive'. [emphasis added]
[614] Of course, many traders will attempt to make their rivals’ bids  uncompetitive.  They may do so by cost reduction, quality,  service or other  attribute of their product or service.  Here, however, the posited circumstance  is that a trader has taken advantage  of a substantial degree of market power  with the purpose in question.
...
[616] ... The purpose of the bid and its structure was to foreclose the  likelihood or restrict the possibility of a competitor’s  bid having any  realistic prospect of success.  The stubbornness of Mr Browne’s attitude  to the request for Offer 1A in SA in  2001 reflects the reality of the purpose of  the structure of the bids.  To give a genuine discount for volume would be to  make Fresenius’ and Gambro’s PD bids ones that had realistic  prospects of success.  It was that that was to be prevented, thereby protecting  the PD revenue stream.
[617] ... My findings as to a proscribed purpose therefore should  be seen as distinct from and in no way negating my findings as to  whether Baxter  took advantage of its market power.
Exclusive dealing
There was no real issue that the conduct fell within the definition of exclusive dealing and was prohibited if it substantially lessened competition ( s 47(10) ). His Honour noted that 'lessening competition' includes 'preventing or hindering' competition ( s 4G ). His Honour further observed that:
[620] The preventing or hindering of  competition must be of the competitive process: Stirling Harbour ... ASX Operations Pty Ltd v Pont Data Australia Pty  Ltd (No 1) (1990) 27 FCR 460 at 478; and Universal Music ... at [242] and [266].  Competition or the competitive process is  the means of protecting the interests of consumers: Queensland Wire at  191.
...
[621] The identification of the competitive process and thus competition which  may be affected requires a temporal reference point.   The relevant time period  in which to judge or assess the competitive process will depend on all the  circumstances of the case, including  the structure of the industry and the  asserted anti-competitive conduct.
[622] Here, one can examine Baxter’s conduct and purpose at a relatively  high level of generality and long range time period:   Was the purpose to affect  the viability of entry of competitors into the Australian market?  Was the  effect to prevent same?  Was  Fresenius dissuaded from building a competitive  factory in Australia?  Were Fresenius and Gambro so affected by the loss of the  tenders  in 1998-2001 as not to be able to bid competitively in later years, for  example because of the development of incumbency advantages  in Baxter?
[623] At another level, focussing more on the tender process as the chosen  competitive process, different questions arise.  They do  not involve directly  any examination of long term effects on entry, incumbency advantages and the  like, though these matters may  flow from the discussion.  Rather, they involve  an examination of the purpose and effect of the conduct on the operation of the  tender  process as the mechanism that had been chosen by the SPAs as buyers for  them to buy goods in the market.
[624] Each of the SPAs and the State governments which put in place a tender  process intended that the operation of that process would  produce real  competition for the products the subject of the tender process. The purpose of  Baxter was, as I have said, to structure  the bids made by it in a way to prevent  rival bidders for PD products from being able to put forward bids that were  realistically  competitive, by the existence of credible alternative high  item-by-item pricing.  The purpose was to ensure, as far as possible,  that the  competitive process of the tender process would not bring about realistically  competitive bids for PD products by tying  or bundling PD products to sterile  fluids, and by providing a credible alternative which would make a choice of any  likely rival  PD product financially damaging to the State. [emphasis added]
[625] Is that a purpose of "lessening competition"?  In my view it is.  The  competitive process here was the tender system used by the  States.  Suppliers in  the relevant field were asked to bid on an hypothesis that each would be  competing in a process that would  be conducted in such a way as would enable  each, subject to price and quality considerations, to have a realistic prospect  of success.   That is the nature of a tender process.  Of course, if the quality  of a rival’s product is inferior, or its price too high,  its prospects of  success will be low.  However, if there are rivals with equivalent products and  there is no reason to think that  they are any less efficient than each other,  conduct, which enables one rival to ensure that the others’ bids cannot be  realistically  competitive in the process, requires examination.  If this effect  on the prospects of success by rivals is a result of some competitive  edge (a  new process, a new invention, a radically reduced cost base) one can conclude  that the other rivals’ bids are not competitive  by reason only of the  success of the competitive process.  Here, however, one may conclude that the  rivals’ bids are not competitive  by reason of the realistic consequences  that will occur to the buyer if the condition imposed by one rival on its offer  to supply  is not complied with.  In those circumstances, it is the perceived  consequences of not accepting the offer of bundled supply, that  is, of not  accepting the offer amounting to exclusive dealing within s 47(2), which hinders  the effective operation of the tender process in relation to PD products.  That  plainly was the purpose of the bundled  bids.  That purpose, in my view, is one  directed to hindering the competitive process of the tender bids and so  hindering competition. [emphasis added]
[626] This approach to the conduct and the purpose of Baxter concentrates upon  that part of the conduct which was an offer to supply  on the stated conditions  up to the entry into each contract.  The entry into each agreement and the  supply of products under each  agreement cannot be said to have been for the  purpose of hindering the competitive process in the form of the tender process  since  that process was complete.  This conduct must be examined for  Baxter’s purpose and its effect at a higher level of generality  and in a  wider temporal framework.
His Honour then considered the meaning of the word 'substantially' in s 47(10):
[628] The word "substantial" has the sense of being meaningful or relevant to  the "competitive process": Rural Press v ACCC at 229, 220 and 249 ,[41],  [2] and [108]; citing French J in Stirling at 40,732.  See also Rural  Press v ACCC at [41] and ftnt 26 for the proposition that it is not  sufficient for liability merely because the relevant effect was quantitatively  more than insignificant or not insubstantial.
[629] Viewed from the perspective of the effect on the tender process, the  purpose was substantially to hinder the competitive process  and so substantially  to affect competition.  Viewed from the same perspective, the likely effect on  the competitive process was as  was intended by Baxter. ... the likely effect at the time of the offering to supply (see Universal Music at [247]) was to hinder substantially the tender process of PD products in  the way that I have identified in dealing with purpose. ...
His Honour then considered the meaning of the word 'likely', concluding that the balance of authority favoured construing likely to mean 'real chance or possibility' [para 633] and not a 'mere possibility'.
His Honour went on to discuss submissions made by Baxter and some of the relevant market conditions.
His Honour concluded that the conduct of Baxter in 'responding to requests for tenders and in negotiating the contracts in question [amounted] to a contravention of s 47 of the Act' [para 643]
Crown Immunity
His Honour concluded that Act did not apply to Baxter's conduct based on principles of derivative Crown Immunity
 
Full Federal Court
The Full Federal Court agreed with the primary Judge that Baxter benefited from derivative Crown immunity and therefore did not consider the substance of the s 46 and s 47 claims (see below the Court's discussion following remission from High Court )
 
High Court
The issue for the High Court was whether Baxter benefited from derivative crown immunity; in particular, whether ss 46 and 47 applied to their dealings with a State or Territory government where the government's conduct was not in the course of carrying on a business and was therefore not subject to the Act ( s 2B ). The appeal was allowed and the matter remitted to the Full Court of the Federal Court
Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and Crennan JJ
The majority held that the Federal Court erred in finding that derivative Crown immunity protected Baxter in this case and upheld the appeal. In particular, they concluded that, in dealing with state purchasing authorities, Baxter was bound by ss 46 and 47.
Kirby J
Agreed with the majority that the appeal should be upheld.
Callinan J
Justice Callinan dissented, holding that Bradken remained as authority covering this case with the result that he would have dismissed the appeal.
 
Full Federal Court (on remission from High Court)
Justice Mansfield
Justice Mansfield agreed with the conclusions of Justice Allsop at First Instance; in particular, there was a misuse of market power contravening s 46 and exclusive dealing conduct which contravened s 47 of the Act.
Misuse of market power
Substantial market power
Justice Mansfield agreed with the primary judge's conclusion on the issue of market power - in particular, that Baxter did have a substantial degree of power in the Australia-wide sterile fluids market.
Taking advantage of market power
Both the ACCC and Baxter appealed on this point; the former because Justice Allsop concluded that only one of the agreements satisfied this element. His Honour noted that he did not:
[para 133] consider that the absence of analysis of  Baxter’s item-by-item prices as monopoly prices is, in the  circumstances  of this case, an evidential impediment to concluding that Baxter, by its  alternative offer strategy, took advantage  of its substantial degree of power in  that market.
His Honour concluded that Baxter had taken advantage of its market power.
[149] [Baxter] …  had been using that strategy [of alternative tenders; item by item or bundled]  for the best part of a decade, if not longer.  As a general proposition, Baxter could have made alternative  item-by-item tenders and exclusive supply bundled tenders even if it did not  have market power:  see e.g. per Gummow,  Hayne and Heydon JJ in Rural Press at [52].  However, it is not merely the fact of alternative tenders which is  significant.  It is that the item-by-item  prices were relatively so high compared to the alternative bundled offer, and  were also so much higher than had previously been paid by any relevant SPA that  Baxter did not regard those prices as "serious". [emphasis added]
[150] In my view,  that feature of the item-by-item pricing tends to indicate that Baxter was  taking advantage of its market power.  Had there been any serious competitor in the sterile fluids market,  Baxter could not rationally have made what appears to have been an  unrealistically high item-by-item price for sterile fluids.  It would have been constrained from doing so  by the competition in the market.  … [emphasis added]
[152] … in my view  the pricing structure of the item-by-item bids as part of Baxter’s alternative  offer strategy involved it taking advantage of its substantial degree of market  power in the sterile fluids market.  On  the evidence, it created that dramatic price differential without reference to  its costs of production.  It suggested no  economic foundation for its item-by-item pricing.  Its item-by-item prices or "cherry pick" prices … were always substantially above what the particular SPA was then  paying, in some instances or items by more than 100 per cent.  None of the itemised prices had ever been  paid by any of the Hospital facilities of the States or the ACT.  Baxter did not expect any of the SPAs to  seriously consider accepting those prices; only that they be seen as  credible.  It was not merely its general  economic status which enabled it to engage in the impugned conduct.  It was able to do so because it had no real  competitors in the sterile fluids market. [emphasis added]
[153] In my view,  Baxter therefore took advantage of its substantial degree of market power in  the sterile fluids market by engaging in its alternative offer strategy,  including in particular by its pricing level for sterile fluids in its  item-by-item bids.
Prohibited purpose
His Honour considered that the trail judges findings should be upheld; in particular, his Honour's 'conclusion  that Baxter’s purpose was not within s 46(1)(a) should be upheld' [para 174] and 'Baxter’s purpose in  engaging in the impugned conduct fell within s 46(1)(c),  so that it contravened  s 46(1) of the Act.'
Exclusive dealing
His Honour noted that there was
[at 193] ‘no dispute that Baxter’s impugned conduct  amounted to conduct that fell within s 47(2).   That is quite clear:  its  alternative offer strategy included offering to supply sterile fluids and PD  fluids on the condition that the relevant SPAs would not acquire, or would  acquire only to a limited extent, PD fluids from any competitor of Baxter in  the PD fluids market.
[194] Consequently, its impugned conduct contravened  s 47(1) provided it also came within s 47(10).’
His Honour agreed with the primary judge's approach
[241]  In my judgment, the primary judge was correct to look at the purpose and effect  of Baxter’s conduct by reference to the tender process or processes and their  potential or actual outcomes.  The focus  of s 47(2) relates to particular transactional behaviour by a participant in a  market.  It is accepted that, by engaging  in its alternative offer strategy, Baxter did engage in the practice of  exclusive dealing.  Section 47(10) then  directs attention to the purpose or effect of the exclusive dealing:  does it have the purpose or effect of  substantially lessening competition?  By  reason of s 4G, that means asking whether it has the purpose or effect of  preventing or hindering competition.   Then s 47(13)(b) makes it clear that the reference to "competition" is a  reference to competition in any market in which either Baxter or any person  whose business dealings are limited or restricted by the conduct  participates.  Relevantly, that is  principally the PD fluids market.
[242]  Those provisions direct attention to the purpose or effect of the impugned  conduct upon competition in the market for the supply of PD fluids.  That market, at the times of the impugned  conduct, included the market for the supply of PD fluids to the several SPAs.  In fact, it is clear that the supply of PD  fluids to the SPAs represented a significant part of the market.  By its impugned conduct, Baxter sought to cut  its competitors in that market out of the opportunity to supply PD fluids to  the SPAs.  That is, Baxter sought, by  engaging in exclusive dealing, to prevent or hinder its competitors competing  to supply PD fluids to that part of the market.   The proscription of exclusive dealing is precisely to prevent that from  happening which did happen, provided s 47(10) is satisfied.  The immediate competition in the market for  the supply of PD fluids at the time of the proscribed conduct was for the  opportunity to supply PD fluids to the relevant SPA.  That competition was affected by Baxter’s  exclusive dealing.  It was Baxter’s  purpose to do so:  it wanted to win that  competition in the market by exclusive dealing, that is by making its  competitors’ tenders for the supply of PD fluids realistically unacceptable to  the SPAs by bundling its tenders and by its alternative offer strategy.
[243]  In my view, it was appropriate for the primary judge to consider whether  Baxter’s conduct had the purpose or effect of preventing or hindering Gambro  and Fresenius from competing in the market for the supply of PD fluids to the  SPAs.  Of course, it may have done so  legitimately.  It may have done so by  price, quality or service differentials in relation to PD fluids.  But it could not lawfully do so by engaging  in exclusive dealing, if its conduct had the quality described in s 47(10).
[244]  In answering that question, namely did Baxter’s conduct have the quality  described in s 47(10), there is no reason to exclude the immediate effect of  the impugned conduct from consideration of whether the purpose or effect of  substantially lessening competition.  It  would make no sense to do so, given s 47 proscribes exclusive dealing precisely  because it may substantially lessen competition in a market in which the issue  is the opportunity to supply to that market at that time.  … In the present circumstances, the real and  immediate competition was (or included) the competition through the tender  processes to supply PD fluids to the SPAs.   Indeed, I would take one step further than the primary judge.  The exclusive dealing did not come to an end  by the making of the tenders.  It extended  to the entering into each of the impugned Agreements (other than the 1999 ACT  Agreement).  The entry into the sole  supply agreements was the perfection of Baxter’s intention to secure that part  of the market to itself by its exclusive dealing.
[245]  The relevant control, in my view, is that imposed by s 47(10): the need for  there to be a purpose or effect or likely effect of substantially lessening  competition in a market.  Whether  exclusive dealing does substantially lessen competition is a complex issue of  fact to be decided in each case upon the whole of the evidence.  If a tender process is subverted by exclusive  dealing, it may or may not have the specified quality depending upon a range of  matters: the suppliers in the market and their relative positions and  vulnerabilities; the acquirers in the market and their relative positions; the  extent of the market on offer by the particular tender; and no doubt other  matters.
[246]  Once one moves then to consider that complex factual issue, in my view –  provided it was legitimate to treat the impugned conduct in an aggregated way  (as I think the primary judge may have done) – his Honour was clearly correct  in the conclusion he reached.
[247]  Baxter’s alternative offer strategy was to hinder or prevent Gambro and  Fresenius from being able to compete in the tender processes of the SPAs and to  secure that part of the market then on offer to itself.  Its purpose, to paraphrase in terms of s  47(10) and s 47(13), was to lessen the competition in the tender processes by  making its rivals’ tenders unacceptable to the SPAs on economic grounds so as  to restrict or limit the opportunity for Gambro and Fresenius to supply, or  being likely to supply, PD fluids to the SPAs.   The effect or likely effect of Baxter’s conduct was that it would be  awarded the contracts over the tenders of Gambro and Fresenius.  Its alternative offer strategy achieved its  purpose and had that effect. … [emphasis added]
[252]  It is clear that, in the market for the supply of PD fluids, the supply to the  SPAs was an important component.  The  evidence indicated that collectively that supply represented a very significant  proportion of the market.  … because the  opportunity to supply each SPA with sterile fluids did not occur simultaneously  but occurred over a progressive period of time, each tender process represented  an opportunity to supply to a significant acquirer of PD fluids in the  Australia wide market.
[253]  Consequently, even if for the purposes of s 47 each tender process should be  viewed separately, in my view the primary judge could have decided, as he did,  that the conduct of Baxter had the purpose or effect, or likely effect, of  substantially lessening competition in the market for the supply of PD  fluids.  I respectfully agree with the  conclusion of the primary judge.
Justice Dowsett (dissenting)
Misuse of market power
Dowsett J dissented because he did not  consider Baxter had the requisite prohibited purpose; however, his Honour generally  agreed with Mansfield J on the issue of taking advantage [para 289].
On the issue of purpose his Honour agreed, for the reasons given by Mansfield J, that there was no purpose proscribed by s 46(1)(a). However, he also concluded there was no purpose proscribed by s 46(1)(c) - that of deterring or preventing competitive conduct. His Honour observed:
[305]  I accept that there is a distinction between preventing competitors from  tendering and preventing them from tendering so as to  be successful.  However I  am unable to discern the difference between trying to win a tender and trying to  prevent competitors from  winning (or being "realistically competitive").
...
[324]  If Baxter had such a proscribed purpose, one would have expected to be  able to identify, at least in a generic way, the conduct  which it proposed to  deter or prevent.  His Honour’s findings exclude the possibility that  Baxter’s purpose was to deter  or prevent its competitors from continuing  to tender as and when tenders were called.  As far as I can see, no other  relevant conduct  could have been the subject of such a purpose.  Further, it is  incorrect to describe Fresenius and Gambro’s bids as uncompetitive.   Their  bids may well have been competitive in that they influenced Baxter’s  prices for PD fluids.  The evidence indicates  that local manufacture of  PD fluids did not give Baxter a substantial advantage as to pricing.  On at  least one occasion Baxter’s  bids for PD fluids were lower than a  competitor’s but generally, the case seems to have been conducted on the  basis that  such bids were more or less comparable.  Had the competitors’ bids been persistently and significantly lower than Baxter’s,  the matter  would have been rather more complicated than it seems to have been.  In that  sense competitors’ bids were "competitive" even if they did not succeed.   Further, competitors would have been interested in the other sectors of the  national PD fluids  market to which I have referred.
[325]  The learned primary Judge’s approach would mean that in any  tendering process, a tenderer with market power would be obliged  to ask, not  only how it could give the most favourable price to a potential purchaser,  consistent with its own desire to make a profit,  but also whether or not such a  bid might be seen as an intended discouragement to competitors.  It is difficult  to identify likely  criteria for distinguishing between trying to win a tender  and trying to make a competing bid uncompetitive.  The primary Judge’s  approach would affect suppliers other than monopolists or near monopolists.  A  supplier may not know whether it has market power  in the relevant sense, or  whether it is taking advantage of it.  It is one thing to expect that a supplier  who has the intention  of deterring or preventing competition should look to the  Act.  It is quite another to expect a supplier, who wishes to bid so as  to  defeat a competitor’s tender, to ask whether it (the supplier) has market  power and is exercising it in so bidding.  It  seems unlikely that Parliament had  such an intention.
[326]  I should make some other short points.  ACCC sought to advance a case  based upon an ongoing course of conduct over many years.   I do not see  justification for attributing greater significance to any aspect of  Baxter’s conduct, when viewed as part of  such a whole, than when examined  separately, save as to questions concerning its perceptions and purposes.  In my  view his Honour’s  findings excluded the possibility that Baxter had a  proscribed purpose in any of the impugned transactions.  It was open to the  primary  Judge to infer from Baxter’s conduct, including its repetition  over time, that its purpose was to dissuade competitors from  remaining in the  market.  As ACCC submitted, it is only a short step from finding that a  commercial undertaking has acted repeatedly  in a way which is capable of  producing a particular result to finding that it has the purpose of producing  that result.  However  his Honour did not reach that conclusion, ... my reasoning in connection with s 46(1)(c) applies  in connection with all of the relevant agreements, including those entered into  with Queensland, South Australia and the Australian  Capital Territory.
[327]  The evidence did not establish a purpose within s 46(1)(c).   Although for different reasons, I consider that his Honour  was correct to  dismiss the s 46 case.
Exclusive dealing
His Honour did not consider that the requirements of s 47(10) had been satisfied in this case and would have set aside the primary Judge's finding on s 47.
[352]  The primary Judge found that Baxter had the purpose of lessening,  preventing or hindering competition in a relevant market, and  that such conduct  had that effect or likely effect.  These findings were in no sense dependent  upon a detailed examination of competition  in any market as contemplated in the  above authorities.  They were based upon purpose and effect or likely effect in  connection with  competitors’ tenders in individual tender processes.  His  Honour found that Baxter’s purpose was to attract as much business  as  possible, not to lessen competition.  However he also found that the states had  selected the tender process as their method of  awarding contracts.  Bundling,  with the purpose of defeating a competitor’s tender was, in his  Honour’s view, for the  purpose of ensuring "that the competitive process  of the tender process would not bring about realistically competitive bids for  PD products".  His Honour concluded that such a purpose was proscribed by  s 46(1)(c).  His Honour also found that if bundling  had the effect, or  likely effect, of making a competitor’s tender uncompetitive, then it had  the effect or likely effect of  lessening competition in the relevant market. ...
[353]  His Honour’s approach equates conduct with regard to one  transaction in the relevant market (the tender process) with competition  in that  market.  Yet, according to the decision in Dandy Power (at 259),  competition in a market is "the sum of activity engaged in by persons in  promoting the sale to potential buyers of the  goods with which that market is  concerned".  The cases demonstrate that lessening of competition is to be  determined by looking at  the state of competition in the market before, and  after, the relevant conduct or, in the case of proposed conduct, with and  without  it.  In any event it is difficult to accept that hindering one  transaction in a market necessarily involves hindering competition  as a whole in  that market.  Baxter’s conduct may have produced the effect or likely  effect that it won the tender and its competitors  lost.  However that did not  necessarily lead to a finding that competition in the market was prevented or  impeded.
[354]  ... the primary Judge observed that potential suppliers tendered  upon the hypothesis that the tender process would be conducted "in such a way as  would enable each, subject to price and quality conditions, to have a realistic  prospect of success".  Whilst fairness  may be expected in public tenders, the  real purpose, as I understand it, is to obtain, with probity, goods upon the  best available  terms from the purchaser’s point of view.  As I have  previously observed tenderers generally aim to maximize market share by  defeating all competitors. Section 47 is not designed to ensure fairness  to competitors but to protect competition in the market. [emphasis added]
[355]  His Honour held that bundling with the purpose of defeating a  competitor’s bid was, itself, sufficient to satisfy the purpose  requirement of subs 47(10).  I doubt whether s 47 was designed to  produce that effect.  It is difficult to believe that  a supplier would engage in  bundling for any purpose other than to maximize market share at the expense of  competitors.  If the intention  underlying s 47 had been to outlaw bundling  with that purpose, there would have been no need to construct the complex  inter-relationship  between subss 47(1), (2), (10) and (13).  It would have  been necessary only to outlaw bundling for the purpose of gaining a  trading  advantage.  The authorities to which I have referred do not support his  Honour’s view of the section.  Further, the  primary Judge’s approach  overlooks the difference in focus as between s 46 and s 47.   Section 46 focuses on  purpose in connection with competitors or potential  competitors, although with the ultimate purpose of protecting competition.   Section 47  focuses on purpose, effect or likely effect in connection with  competition in a relevant market.  His Honour’s approach is  more  appropriate to the focus of s 46 than to that of s 47.  I see no  warrant for treating these different focusses as  being the same.
[356]  On the primary Judge’s approach at the "lower" level,  identification of effect or likely effect becomes a very easy exercise.   It  requires no examination of the state of competition in the market.  It is  necessary only to identify an aspect of such competition  which has been  hindered, or is likely to be hindered, by the relevant conduct.  In the present  case, the primary Judge seems to have  assumed that Baxter’s tender  strategy probably hindered or prevented competition simply because it was likely  to succeed.
[357]  In my view the primary Judge’s approach, based upon purpose,  effect or likely effect with regard to each individual tender  process was  incorrect.  The proper approach was to assess those matters with regard to the  identified markets, primarily the PD fluids  market.  As much appears from  the cases to which I have referred.  In Dandy Power, the relevant conduct  was refusal of supply to a retailer.  Smithers J looked to effect on  competition in the market as a whole,  not to the mere fact that a competitor had  been excluded.  In Outboard Marine, the conduct was, again, refusal of  supply to a retailer.  The alleged lessening of competition was that the conduct  would deprive  potential purchasers of the opportunity to compare rival products  side-by-side.  The paragraph on 670, commencing with the words "The weight of  the authorities ...", is particularly relevant for present purposes.  That  paragraph is set out above.  It suggests  that effect upon an individual  competitor is not sufficient to engage s 47.  It is necessary to look to  effect in the market  as a whole.  Similarly, consumer convenience is not an  important feature.  Each SPA’s choice of a particular method of acquiring  supply falls into the category of consumer convenience.
[His Honour then discussed some s 47 authorities]
[362]  In the present case the primary Judge’s finding that  Baxter’s conduct had a proscribed purpose, effect or likely  effect was  based upon a misinterpretation of ss 47(10) and (13) and 46.  That finding  must be set aside.
Justice Gyles
His Honour held that the impugned contracts breached s 47 (para 397).
 
Penalties were determined by Justice Mansfield as follows:
Pecuniary penalties in respect of four contraventions amounting to a total of $4.9 million
Costs - Baxter Healthcare to pay the ACCC costs of proceedings 'at first instance and on appeal to the Full Court,  other than the costs of the hearing as to whether pecuniary penalties should be  imposed' (for which submissions were to be made)
In determining the appropriate penalty his Honour considered the matters set out in section 76 and Justice French's discussion of those matters in Trade Practices Commission v CSR Limited (1991) ATPR 41-076 at 52, 152-3. His Honour then noted that:
[para 21] Underlying  each of those matters is the proposition that fundamentally a pecuniary penalty  should be imposed where it has an appropriate deterrent effect, and to the  extent and only to the extent that it will have a deterrent effect, both on the  particular contravenor of the TP Act, and upon those who may be disposed to  engage in conduct of a similar kind prohibited by the TP Act.  ... The  penalty should not be so high as to be oppressive, but should be sufficient to  achieve the object of both particular and general deterrence.  In Australian  Competition and Consumer Commission v Leahy Petroleum Pty Ltd (No 3) (2005)  215 ALR 301 at [39] Goldberg J said:
The penalty imposed must be substantial enough that the party realises the  seriousness of its conduct and is not inclined to repeat such conduct.   Obviously the sum required to achieve the subject will be larger where the court  is setting a penalty for a company with vast resources.  However, as specific  deterrence is only one element and general deterrence must also be achieved,  consideration of the party’s capacity to pay must be weighed against the  need to impose a sum which members of the public will recognise as significant  and proportionate to the seriousness of the  contravention.
[para 22] Where  there are multiple contraventions, it is also appropriate to have regard to the  totality principle. ...
[para 24] The  nature and extent of the contravening conduct is best judged in the light of the  circumstances in which that conduct took place.  Its nature includes  consideration of the extent of deliberateness with which the conduct was engaged  in, the period over which the conduct was undertaken, the extent to which senior  management in Baxter was involved in the contravention, and whether or not the  conduct was systematic or covert.
[para 25] Similarly,  the consequences of the contravening conduct should be assessed not simply  having regard to the loss or damage caused, but the degree of market power of  Baxter, and its size, and the extent to which it profited or may have profited  from the contravening conduct.
 