Feb
MAR
Apr
17
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
17 Mar 16 - 17 Mar 16
Close Help
Search
Options
Cancel changes
All of these words
This exact phrase
Any of these words
None of these words
Apply
Cancel
Follow us:
Subscription benefits
Log in
Subscribe today
Publications
Research topics
Topics home
People
Artists and Entertainers
Company executives
Historical figures
Politicians and Government officials
World Leaders
Issues and Events
Health and Medicine
Historical Events
Religion and Theology
Science and Technology
Places
Organizations
A-Z
A-G
H-O
P-T
U-Z
0-9
Publications home
Journals
Academic journals
Business journals
Education journals
Math and Engineering journals
Medical journals
Science and Technology journals
Trade journals
Magazines
Business magazines
Computer magazines
Education magazines
Industry magazines
Lifestyle magazines
Medical magazines
Newspapers
International newspapers and newswires
Reports, newsletters, and transcripts
U.K. newspapers
U.S. newspapers and newswires
Reference works and books
Almanacs
Dictionaries and thesauruses
Encyclopedias
Non-fiction books
search
toggle menu
Subscription benefits
Log in
PUBLICATIONS HOME
Journals
Academic journals
Business journals
Education journals
Math and Engineering journals
Medical journals
Science and Technology journals
Trade journals
Magazines
Business magazines
Computer magazines
Education magazines
Industry magazines
Lifestyle magazines
Medical magazines
Newspapers
International newspapers and newswires
Reports, newsletters, and transcripts
U.K. newspapers
U.S. newspapers and newswires
Reference works and books
Almanacs
Dictionaries and thesauruses
Encyclopedias
Non-fiction books
Home » Publications » International newspapers and newswires » International newswires » Mondaq Business Briefing » August 2007 »
Save
This article has been saved!
You may organize and add notes about this article below.
This article has been saved!
View all saved articles
Export
To export this article to Microsoft Word, please log in or subscribe.
Have an account?
Please log in
Not a subscriber?
Sign up today
Print
Cite
MLA
" ACCC V Baxter Healthcare - Derivative Crown Immunity Confined.
(Australian Competition and Consumer Commission)(Case overview) ."
Mondaq Business Briefing.
Mondaq Ltd. 2007.
HighBeam Research.
17 Mar. 2016 < https://www.highbeam.com >.
Chicago
"ACCC V Baxter Healthcare - Derivative Crown Immunity Confined.
(Australian Competition and Consumer Commission)(Case overview)."
Mondaq Business Briefing.
2007.
HighBeam Research.
(March 17, 2016).
https://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-168214459.html
APA
"ACCC V Baxter Healthcare - Derivative Crown Immunity Confined.
(Australian Competition and Consumer Commission)(Case overview)."
Mondaq Business Briefing.
Mondaq Ltd. 2007.
Retrieved March 17, 2016 from HighBeam Research: https://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-168214459.html
Please use HighBeam citations as a starting point only.
Not all required citation information is available for every article, and citation requirements change over time.
ACCC V Baxter Healthcare - Derivative Crown Immunity Confined.
(Australian Competition and Consumer Commission)(Case overview)
Mondaq Business Briefing
See all results for this publication
Browse back issues of this publication by date
August 31, 2007 | Copyright
COPYRIGHT 2009 Mondaq Ltd.
This material is published under license from the publisher through the Gale Group, Farmington Hills, Michigan.
All inquiries regarding rights or concerns about this content should be directed to Customer Service .
Permalink
Create a link to this page
Copy and paste this link tag into your Web page or blog:
<a href="https://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-168214459.html" title="ACCC V Baxter Healthcare - Derivative Crown Immunity Confined.(Australian Competition and Consumer Commission)(Case overview) | HighBeam Research">ACCC V Baxter Healthcare - Derivative Crown Immunity Confined.
(Australian Competition and Consumer Commission)(Case overview)</a>
Yesterday, the High Court handed down its decision in the case of  Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Baxter Healthcare Pty  Limited & Others [2007] HCA 38.
The decision is of particular  interest to departments and agencies engaged in procurement, and  businesses dealing with government.
It is a timely reminder about the  value of competitive procurement processes.
This special Alert discusses the implications that arise for  government and business as a consequence of the Court's decision to  qualify the doctrine of derivative Crown immunity and apply Part IV of  the Trade Practices Act 1974 (Cth).
On 29 August 2007, the High Court held that Baxter Healthcare Pty  Limited (Baxter) was bound by sections 46 and 47 of the Trade Practices  Act - even when dealing with government entities which were not bound by  the Act.
As a result, the question of breach has been remitted to the  Full Federal Court.
In reaching its conclusion the High Court held that an earlier  decision of Bradken Consolidated Ltd v Broken Hill Co Ltd (1979) CLR 107  (Bradken) was no longer authoritative law on the doctrine of derivative  Crown immunity.
Factual background
At first instance it was held that Baxter would have breached  sections 46 (misuse of market power) and 47 (exclusive dealing) of the  Trade Practices Act had it not been protected by the doctrine of  derivative Crown immunity.
The appeal did not require the Court to  decide whether contracts between Baxter and the relevant government  authorities were enforceable.
At the time of the alleged breaches Baxter was, for all practical  purposes, the sole supplier of high volume, low value, sterile fluids in  Australia.
These fluids are an essential item for every hospital in  Australia.
Baxter also supplied low volume, high value products with  very specialised uses (such as peritoneal dialysis) - but there were  rival companies seeking to supply competing products.
Between 1998 and 2001, Baxter responded to a series of tenders  called by State and Territory health purchasing authorities, typically  offering to supply its products on the following alternate bases.
…
To read the full text of this article and others like it, subscribe today!
Related articles on HighBeam Research
Searching…
See all related articles »
Publication Finder
Browse back issues from our extensive library of more than 6,500 trusted publications.
Popular publicationson HighBeam Research
NPR All Things Considered
News transcripts
The Nation
Political magazines
The Washington Post
Washington D.C. newspapers
The Economist (US)
Political magazines
Harper's Magazine
Cultural magazines
Company
About us
Subscription benefits
Group subscriptions
Partnership opportunities
Careers
Privacy policy
Terms and conditions
Contact us
Help topics
FAQ
Search tips
Using the Research Center
Billing questions
Rights inquiries
Customer Service
Cengage Learning Network
Questia
CengageBrain.com
HighBeam Business
Encyclopedia.com
ed2go
MiLadyPro
HighBeam Research
Follow us:
HighBeam Research is operated by Cengage Learning .
© Copyright 2016.
All rights reserved.
The HighBeam advertising network includes: womensforum.com GlamFamily