Feb
MAR
Apr
17
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
17 Mar 16 - 17 Mar 16
Close Help
Australian Trade Practices News
Issue 589
4 July 2007
Editor Leela Cejnar BA LLM (Syd)
FEATURE
Failed ACCC fixation on price fixing leaves retailers on a high
by Peta Stevenson*, Senior Associate, and Melissa Heris, Solicitor, Mallesons Stephen Jaques, Sydney
On 29 May 2007, the ACCC failed in its bid to have eight Geelong petrol retailers found guilty of price-fixing by the Federal Court. The decision, in
ACCC
v
Leahy Petroleum Pty Ltd
[2007] FCA 794 1 , represents another illustration of the difficulties associated with establishing a breach of s 45 of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act) by relying on circumstantial evidence.
Background
In November 2003, the ACCC commenced proceedings against eight petrol retailers and 10 individuals in the Geelong area for alleged contraventions of s 45 of the TP Act.
It was not in dispute that representatives of the retailers had made regular telephone calls to each other about possible increases in the price of unleaded petrol, and discussed the size and approximate time of price rises. What was at issue was whether these conversations gave rise to a contract, arrangement or understanding that had the purpose or the likely effect of fixing, controlling or maintaining the price for petrol.
The ACCC alleged that these communications gave rise to eight separate “understandings”, seven of which each involved two retailers and one of which involved three retailers. The understandings were said to have operated serially, with price information and commitments flowing from one set of retailers to the next, consequent upon information being communicated under the principal understanding between Leahy and APCO 2 .
Each of these understandings was alleged to contain a provision which had the purpose of fixing the price of unleaded petrol, by providing for competitors to give advance notice of decisions to change prices to a particular level at a particular time and providing assurance that other market participants would increase their prices at or about the advised time to prices at or about the same as the advised prices. The retailers were alleged to have given effect to the understandings on up to 95 occasions when they changed their prices in 1999 and 2000.
The evidence used by the ACCC to support its allegations came in a number of forms:
• some of the retailers admitted the substance of the allegations made against them
• a number of individuals gave direct evidence on behalf of the ACCC at the trial, and
• circumstantial evidence in the form of records of telephone calls made between the retailers, and records of changes to the retail price of petrol.
Was there an understanding?
Justice Gray emphasised that for an understanding to exist, there must be an element of commitment, moral obligation, or obligation binding in honour, to observe and adhere to the arrangement or understanding.
It was clear that competitors in the Geelong retail petrol market passed a good deal of information about the levels of retail petrol prices and the timing of price changes among themselves on a substantial number of occasions. However, Justice Gray took the view that passing information about prices does not necessarily indicate the existence of an arrangement or understanding to fix prices in contravention of the TP Act. While privately discussing intended prices was behaviour that lends itself readily to price fixing by competitors (particularly in a market for an homogenous product that experiences frequent price changes, like the petrol market), he considered that, without more, price fixing could not be established based on this type of conduct alone.
In particular, Justice Gray noted that information about prices was also conveyed by the use of display boards, and that the public display of board prices by all or most competitors would ensure a high degree of uniformity for prices in any event. In Justice Gray’s opinion, the only difference between being told of prospective price changes by telephone and by viewing the price boards was that, by being notified orally, competitors were given a slight advantage in terms of time in which to decide how they would respond, if at all.
Justice Gray found that much of the oral evidence confirmed that market participants considered themselves to have free choice to set their prices as they wished, and that they considered other market participants were also morally free not to lift their prices. In addition, the retailers did not see themselves as being able to call other market participants to “tell them off” about their failure to increase prices. Nor did the circumstantial evidence suggest a different conclusion, with many examples of instances in which price rises did not eventuate following a cycle of telephone calls.
The absence of any element of commitment or obligation was, in Justice Gray’s view, fatal to the ACCC’s case, as “an arrangement or understanding in which each party is free to do as it wishes is a creature unknown to s 45(2) of the Trade Practices Act” (at [948]). Accordingly, he concluded that the overall effect of the evidence was that it was more probable than not that none of the arrangements or understandings alleged by the ACCC in fact existed. The alternative submission, that there were instead occasional arrangements and understandings to fix prices, was also dismissed.
Issues with the evidence
This decision also shows how difficult it can be for the ACCC to establish breaches of s 45 of the TP Act, even where parties are willing to cooperate with the ACCC in its investigations, make admissions and provide direct written and oral evidence. Other difficulties arise where a case concerns a series of events over several years, involving a large number of parties.
For example:
• the admissions made by certain participants were said to be of no assistance to the ACCC as they were very general in nature and failed to address each of the elements necessary to establish price fixing
• the data presented by the ACCC — records of communications and price patterns over the period in question — was found to be equivocal at best as to a connection between the timing of the communications and changes in price, and in some instances suggested that prices changed independently of communications had between competitors. In others, the document also suggested conclusions that were inconsistent with oral evidence given
• witnesses’ recollections were often inaccurate when compared to the data, leading to questions of reliability. In addition, the court noted that the requirement that witnesses benefiting from leniency from ACCC prosecution cooperate with the ACCC may provide an incentive for those witnesses to give evidence maximising the role of others, which in this case led to the judge to prefer evidence given “in the box” over written statements negotiated with the ACCC.
Implications of the decision
• Regular price discussions insufficient without more — The parties admitted making regular calls to each other and discussing prices before increasing their own prices. This conduct alone was insufficient to establish a commitment between the retailers to increase their prices.
• Mere expectation not enough — The case confirms that without some commitment to increase prices, a mere expectation that a person will act in a particular manner is insufficient to establish an understanding.
• Roadside advertising — A factor in Justice Gay’s reasoning was the use of roadside boards to display prices in the retail petrol market. This form of price advertising makes it easy for retailers to see competitor prices and subsequently change their own at short notice. There are few industries with this ability to quickly adjust pricing in line with competition.
As a practical matter, the decision leaves the ACCC with a multi-million dollar legal bill, and raises questions about the effective prosecution of cartel conduct. The ACCC has stated that it is considering whether to appeal the Geelong decision, as well as options to provide the ACCC with greater investigatory powers.
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
v
Leahy Petroleum Pty Ltd
[2007] FCA 794.
* Peta Stevenson works in the competition law group at Mallesons Stephen Jaques, Sydney, specialising in competition litigation and enforcement. From time to time, Peta also writes headnotes for cases reported in the Australian Trade Practices Reporter.
Footnotes
1
This case will be reported in an upcoming issue of the Australian Trade Practices Reporter.
2
Related case — This decision follows an unsuccessful appeal by the ACCC to the High Court on alleged price fixing in Ballarat. In those proceedings, the ACCC sought to reverse a decision by the Full Court of the Federal Court that overturned $3.2 million in penalties previously imposed on APCO and its proprietor, Mr Anderson, finding that APCO set its prices on the basis of its own commercial interests (in full knowledge of the information supplied by its competitors) rather than as a consequence of a commitment to other retailers: see
APCO Service Stations Pty Ltd
v
ACCC
(2005) ATPR¶42-078 and
ACCC
v
APCO Service Stations Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA Trans 272.
IMPLIED TERMS — WARRANTIES
Assessment of damages under the Trade Practices Act
Gough & Gilmore Holdings Pty Limited (Gough & Gilmore) carried on the business of selling and servicing Caterpillar earthmoving equipment and parts. In August 1997, Gough & Gilmour and Peter Campbell Earthmoving Pty Limited (PCE) entered into four fixed operating cost underwriting system (FOCUS) contracts for various machinery, and in November 1996, entered into a further four FOCUS contracts. Under the FOCUS contracts, Gough & Gilmour undertook, in consideration of fixed periodical payments made by PCE, to service and maintain earthmoving machines which had been supplied to PCE, without making any further charge.
PCE claimed that various representations had been made by Gough & Gilmore as to the benefits of the FOCUS contracts and the availability rates that PCE would obtain from the machinery as a result of the FOCUS contracts, which induced it to enter into the contracts. PCE alleged that:
(a) those representations were untrue, misleading or deceptive and that there was no reasonable ground for making the representations in breach of s 51A and s 52, and
(b) the representations amounted to a term of each contract being a warranty by Gough & Gilmore, which had been breached.
On 18 November 2005, James J delivered a preliminary judgment which found that Gough & Gilmore did not have reasonable grounds for making the representations as to the high degree of machine availability in relation to five out of the eight machines in question.
In addition to argument as to whether there was a breach of a contractual warranty that a high rate of availability would be achieved and the assessment of any damages for breach of warranty, the parties were also in dispute as to what method should be adopted in assessing damages under the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act) and whether leave should be granted to Gough & Gilmore to amend its defence to the cross claim.
PCE argued that claims for damages under the TP Act should be assessed on the same basis as damages for a claim for breach of contract, rather than the previously accepted position that damages under the TP Act are assessed on a tort or deceit basis.
Under the tort approach, the court must determine how much worse off (if any) a plaintiff is by reason of the contraventions, by comparing the position of the plaintiff after the contraventions with what would have been the plaintiff’s position if the contraventions had not occurred. PCE argued that the applicable law had been changed by the High Court in
Murphy
v
Overton Investments Pty Ltd
(2004) ATPR ¶41-973. Gough & Gilmore submitted that Murphy v Overton Investments was an unusual case and that damages under the TP Act should be assessed on the tort basis in this matter.
As to its defence to the cross-claim, Gough & Gilmore submitted that the need to apply to amend had only arisen after the service of a further report of PCE’s expert, which propounded the way in which damage had been suffered. As a result of that report, Gough & Gilmore sought to plead a defence under s 82(2) of the TP Act that the claim was commenced more than three years after the day on which the cause of action that relates to the conduct accrued, and was thereby statute-barred. PCE argued that the application to amend was made at a late stage in the proceedings which prevented PCE from responding, and that there was no relevant change to its case as a result of the expert’s report.
The application for leave to file amended defence to the cross-claim was granted. It was held that following Murphy v Overton Investments Pty Ltd, the assessment of damages for contraventions of the TP Act has become more flexible and a tort basis of assessment is not necessarily to be applied.
In the circumstances of this case, damages for the contraventions of the TP Act should be assessed on a tort basis and not a contractual basis.
Gough & Gilmour Holdings Pty Limited (No 2)
v
Peter Campbell Earthmoving Pty Limited
(2007) ATPR ¶42-153.
MISLEADING OR DECEPTIVE CONDUCT
Brand substitution
Les Laboratories Servier and Servier Laboratories (Australia) Pty Ltd (together, Servier) distribute perindopril, a drug used to treat hypertension. Perindopril is sold by Servier in Australia under the brand name “Coversyl”. GenRx distributes a generic form of perindopril. This generic form of perindopril is listed on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS) as an “a” flagged product. This means that a doctor may exercise their discretion to prescribe the GenRx perindopril in substitute for Coversyl. A flagging of a generic product also means that a pharmacist may dispense the generic perindopril in certain circumstances, including where the prescribing doctor has not indicated on the prescription form that substitution is not to occur. Standard prescription forms in Australia feature a box which can be ticked by the prescribing doctor indicating to the dispensing pharmacist that brand substitution is not permitted.
In late 2006, Servier published an advertisement in an Australian medical trade publication, The Medical Observer Weekly. The advertisement promoted Coversyl to doctors and included statements that “there is no substitute” (for Servier as a producer of perindopril), that Coversyl has “improved stability” (as a comparative claim about Coversyl and generic substitutes) and an exhortation that the medical practitioner “tick the box” on pharmaceutical scripts that “brand substitution is not permitted”. Servier also distributed approximately 3000 stamps to doctors. The stamps bore the words “Brand substitution not permitted for Coversyl”. Servier intended that the stamps be used on prescriptions in addition to, or in substitution for, the box on the standard prescription forms.
GenRx brought proceedings against Servier, alleging contravention of s 52, 53 and 55 of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act) in the course of advertising and promoting Coversyl. In this interlocutory proceeding, GenRx sought an injunction restraining Servier from advertising and promotingCoversyl pending the determination of the proceedings. In particular, GenRx sought orders prohibiting Servier from:
(a) placing any more advertisements containing the reference to “improved stability”, or
(b) issuing any further stamps.
GenRx also sought an order requiring Servier to recall all of those stamps already issued to doctors. In the course of the proceedings, Servier provided an undertaking not to release any further stamps before the main proceedings were finalised.
GenRx argued that although Servier was permitted to try and persuade doctors not to allow brand substitution, the method of persuasion used by Servier was misleading and deceptive. In particular, the use of the words “improved stability” as a comparative claim about Coversyl as against generic substitutes in the advertisements misleadingly implied some improvement, benefit or superior product performance of Coversyl.
GenRx submitted that the advertisement would cause it to incur losses which would extend simply beyond the loss of the product prescribed in a single prescription if the pharmacist or patient formed the view, as a consequence of the advertisements, that there was a clinical (or other) reason not to substitute GenRx products for Coversyl.
Servier contended that the representation made in the advertisement was true and that doctors would take the advertisement as a whole to indicate that as the producer of Coversyl, it was urging them to exercise their discretion not to permit substitution for reasons of improved stability, among others.
GenRx argued that the use of Servier’s stamp, with its particular mention of Coversyl, conveyed a misleading representation to doctors, pharmacists and patients that brand substitution is not permitted for a reason different from the doctor’s clinical choice; for example, that brand substitution was not permitted by virtue of the legal restrictions imposed by the normal regulatory system. As consequence, GenRx claimed to suffer not only loss of the sale of the product, which was the subject of the prescription, but also the consequences of a belief in the market as to the suitability of its generic perindopril by pharmacists and patients on its brand reputation. In support, GenRx argued that if the stamp was recalled, doctors would still be able to specify no substitution of Coversyl by ticking the box on the standard form.
Servier submitted that the purpose of the stamp was to assist doctors to make clear and visible statements to the prescribing pharmacist that brand substitution is not permitted for Coversyl specifically. This would include circumstances where other medications are prescribed and brand substitution for those medications is permitted, and to counter situations where the pharmacist may overlook ticks placed in the standard form box on the prescriptions.
Servier argued that an order requiring it to recall the stamps would damage its reputation, as it would require it to inform doctors that it may have engaged in inappropriate conduct, could create confusion of doctors, and that a recall would be tantamount to final relief in the proceedings.
The application was granted in part. The court held it was appropriate to grant an injunction to prohibit Servier from placing any further advertisements containing the “improved stability” claim. The court found that no serious inconvenience or injustice would be suffered by Servier if no further advertisements referring to stability were placed, pending the outcome of the main proceedings.
It was also found that where Servier has already undertaken not to release any further stamps, an order recalling those stamps already distributed was not appropriate. The burden of the recall outweighs the potential damage to GenRx if the stamps that had already been distributed, remained in use pending final hearing.
GenRx Pty Limited
v
Les Laboratories Servier
(2007) ATPR ¶42-155.
ENFORCEMENT, REMEDIES AND DEFENCES
Non-compliance with consent orders
Dynacast (Int) Pty Ltd, formerly Phoneflasher.com Pty Ltd (Phoneflasher), retailed a mobile phone accessory in Australia. In mid 2004, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) brought proceedings in the Federal Court against Dynacast, Mr Alan Jorgensen (a former director and major shareholder of Phoneflasher who purported to act on behalf of Phoneflasher in Australia), Ms Jimeale Jorgensen (who was a previous director of the Phoneflasher) and others. The ACCC alleged that together, Phoneflasher, Mr Jorgensen and Ms Jorgensen had falsely represented on Phoneflasher’s website that using the mobile phone accessory would reduce harmful radiation exposure to the user of the telephone and therefore had associated health benefits.
The proceedings were settled by consent orders between the parties on 2 November 2004. The consent orders required Phoneflasher to correct the representations that had been made about the phone accessory. Shortly before making the orders, Phoneflasher’s name was changed to Dynacast (Int) Pty Ltd (Dynacast). Neither the Federal Court nor the ACCC were notified of this change prior to the making of the consent orders.
The consent orders required Phoneflasher to:
• supply each retail outlet to which it had distributed the accessory with a corrective notice and letter withdrawing the representation
• provide the ACCC with a list of the names and addresses of the customers to which it had provided the corrective material
• if trading, establish a trade practices corporate compliance program. Similar obligations were also imposed on Phoneflasher in the event that at the time of the orders it was not trading but did so at a later date, and
• place and maintain a corrective notice on its website (and any other website used to promote the accessory) for a period of six months.
The ACCC brought contempt proceedings against Dynacast and Mr Jorgensen in October 2005, unsatisfied that compliance with the consent orders had been effected. The ACCC joined a number of other parties to the contempt proceedings.
As against Dynacast, the ACCC pressed four charges, to the effect that, while trading as Phoneflasher, it had failed to comply with the consent orders.
The ACCC argued that Mr Jorgensen had committed a contempt by aiding and abetting, counselling and procuring Phoneflasher’s failure or refusal to comply with the consent orders, or in the alternative, wilfully refrained from taking any reasonable steps to ensure that Phoneflasher did comply with its obligations under the Consent Orders. These charges were dependent on the ACCC successfully showing that Mr Jorgensen was,at all relevant times, acting as an officer or director for the purposes of s 9 of the Corporations Act 2001, and as such, had authority to act on its behalf.
Dynacast argued that Phoneflasher had ceased trading since 2003 and that all remaining retail customers had been provided with the corrective material. It asserted that the companies listed on its website as retailers of the accessory included a range of retailers who had been supplied with the accessory by intermediary businesses unrelated to Phoneflasher.
Dynacast also argued that as Phoneflasher had ceased trading, it was relieved of the obligation to implement a trade practices compliance regime. In relation to the obligation to place a corrective notice on the internet, Dynacast and Mr Jorgensen together argued that while Mr Jorgensen had registered the domain name used by Phoneflasher, neither he nor Phoneflasher controlled the content of that website. It was argued that the website was controlled by another company, Shanghai Connexion.com Co Ltd (Shanghai Connexion). Mr Jorgensen produced written evidence to suggest that he had approached Shanghai Connexion seeking to have a notice of the kind required by the Consent Orders, put on the Phoneflasher.com website. The veracity of that evidence was at issue in the proceedings.
Dynacast was found guilty of contempt. Charges of contempt against Mr Jorgensen were unsuccessful.
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
v
Dynacast (Int) Pty Limited
(2007) ATPR ¶42-156.
Contravention and penalty
Tooltechnic Systems (Aust) Pty Ltd (Tooltechnic) carried on the business in Australia of importing and the wholesale supply of power tools under the brand name “Festool”. It had substantial operations in Queensland for which its Queensland area manager was largely responsible. Area managers were involved in sales and visited retailers. Tooltechnic’s Queensland area manager reported regularly to Tooltechnic’s Managing Director by weekly reports and personally at sales meetings.
In 2002 and 2003, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) received complaints from Festool retailers and customers that Tooltechnic had attempted to induce Festool retailers not to sell Festool products for a price less than the recommended trade price. The recommended trade price was specified by Tooltechnic from time to time. The ACCC commenced an investigation into this conduct and brought proceedings against Tooltechnic for alleged resale price maintenance in contravention of s 48 of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act). The ACCC alleged three contraventions of the Act, all in relation to discussions between Tooltechnic’s then Queensland area managers and Festool retailers between November 2001 and May 2002. In each case, it was alleged that Tooltechnic’s managers made statements to the effect that the retailers were not permitted to sell Tooltechnic products below the recommended trade price and if they did, may be treated less favourably. The Queensland area manager had been instructed to make these statements by Tooltechnic’s Managing Director.
Tooltechnic admitted each of the contraventions. Both Tooltechnic and its Managing Director offered the ACCC an undertaking under s 87B of the TP Act. The undertakings included an agreement to establish and implement a trade practices compliance program. The parties also agreed consent orders pursuant to s 80 of the Act which, among other things, restrained Tooltechnic for a period of three years from making statements to Festool retailers or prospective Festool retailers which amounted to resale price maintenance. It was also agreed between the parties that Tooltechnic pay the ACCC’s costs in the sum of $25,000.
The court made declarations in respect of Tooltechnic’s contraventions of s 48, to give effect to the consent orders as agreed between the parties and to determine what penalty should be occasioned by Tooltechnic’s conduct.
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
v
Tooltechnic Systems (Aust) Pty Ltd
(2007) ATPR ¶42-154.
Legal professional privilege
On 22 November 2004, Amcor approached the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission and foreshadowed an application for immunity regarding cartel conduct in relation to corrugated fibre board packaging between 2002 and 2004, pursuant to the ACCC’s June 2003 Leniency Policy for Cartel Conduct. At that time, Amcor informed the ACCC that it was able to provide audio recordings of discussions between Amcor executives, and Amcor and Visy, which it had obtained pursuant to an Anton Pillar order in unrelated Federal Court proceedings.
The ACCC’s Chairman, Graeme Samuel, instructed the ACCC’s General Counsel, Mr Robert Alexander, and Mr Geoffrey Williams (a director in the ACCC’s Enforcement Division) to work on the matter and to report directly to him rather than to the ACCC’s Enforcement Committee. On 22 November 2004, the ACCC issued a notice to produce documents to Amcor under s 155(1)(b) of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act), and on 24 November 2004 issued a notice to produce documents under s 155(1)(b) to Visy. On or about 25 November 2004, the ACCC instructed counsel to seek leave in the extant Federal Court proceedings to use the audio recordings.
On 26 November 2004, a formal application for leniency was made on behalf of Amcor and its current and former officers and employees, excluding particular named executives. On 7 and 8 December 2004, the ACCC received transcripts of the audio recordings. Between 9 and 15 December 2004, Mr Alexander and Mr Williams interviewed a number of current and former Amcor executives including the recently resigned Managing Directors of Amcor Australasia and the Amcor Group, and the managing director of Amcor’s fibre board box division. In this period, Mr Williams also spoke with a solicitor with the Australian Government Solicitor (AGS) regarding the engagement of AGS as the ACCC’s solicitors and the possibility of engaging counsel.
On 16 December 2004, the ACCC’s Enforcement Committee met and directed that Amcor be granted conditional leniency. Between 16 December 2004 and 28 November 2005, the ACCC interviewed a number of witnesses, issued various notices under s 155 and conducted a number of examinations of Visy executives under s 155. On 28 November 2005, the ACCC made an in-principle decision to institute proceedings as recommended by Mr Alexander and Mr Williams, and on 16 December 2005, the ACCC made a final decision to institute proceedings.
On 21 December 2005, the ACCC commenced proceedings against Visy Industries Holdings Pty Ltd, Visy Industries Australia Pty Ltd, Visy Board Pty Ltd, and three current and former officers (Visy), alleging that companies in the Visy group and certain officers of those companies had engaged in price fixing and market sharing with companies in the Amcor group in breach of s 45 of the TP Act.
As part of discovery and pursuant to notices to produce, Visy sought access to the transcripts of the audio recordings and other direct evidence held by the ACCC, correspondence between the ACCC and Amcor, and internal ACCC documents. The ACCC claimed legal professional privilege over documents created after 15 December 2004 on the basis that, from that date, litigation was reasonably anticipated by the ACCC. The ACCC relied on an affidavit of Mr Alexander, in which he deposed that, following the interview of Amcor’s former managing director on 15 December 2004:
(a) he formed the opinion that the ACCC would commence proceedings against Visy in relation to the allegations made by Amcor
(b) he had determined that he would recommend to the ACCC that such proceedings be commenced, and
(c) he considered that the Commissioners would accept that recommendation.
Mr Alexander said that his view was based on the strength of the evidence supplied by Amcor executives, their preparedness to give evidence in court and the ability to use the audio recordings of conversations between senior Amcor and Visy executives.
Visy sought to compel production of the documents over which the ACCC asserted privilege on the ground that it was the ACCC’s resolution to commence proceedings, and not the view of Mr Alexander or Mr Williams, that was relevant. The relevant date from which privilege could accrue, Visy argued, was 28 November 2005, being the date on which the ACCC resolved in-principle to commence proceedings and the documents were therefore not privileged. In addition, Visy submitted that it was not reasonable for the ACCC to anticipate litigation as at 15 December 2004 as the material before it was unsworn, was not in admissible form and no attempt had been made to obtain Visy’s version of events.
Visy also disputed whether the dominant purpose for creating the documents in question was for use in litigation as distinct from the investigation of possible litigation.
In addition to documents relating to the ACCC’s investigation of Visy, Visy sought production of documents relating to Amcor’s immunity application on the basis that they were relevant to substantive issues in the case, as well as to the credit of the particular witnesses and that the ACCC, as the “prosecutor and model litigant”, was duty bound to disclose them.
The application for legal privilege was upheld, the court finding that the relevant question being whether at the relevant time legal proceedings were reasonably anticipated by the ACCC, not whether they were reasonably anticipated by the author of a particular document.
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
v
Visy Industries Holdings Pty Ltd (No 2)
(2007) ATPR ¶42-157.
The constitutional framework — Crown immunity
by Peta Stevenson*
On 9 May 2007, the Federal Court held that by the conduct of the Department of Public Works, the Crown in right of the state of New South Wales was not carrying on a business for the purposes of s 2B of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act).
Eden Constructions Pty Ltd commenced proceedings against the state of New South Wales alleging that the non-award of a civil engineering subcontract amounted to a breach of contract, the commission of various torts, negligent misrepresentation and a contravention of s 46 of the TP Act.
Section 2B provides that Pt IV of the TP Act binds the Crown in right of each of the states so far as the Crown carries on a business, either directly or indirectly.
Justice Graham considered the authorities, including
NT Power Generation Pty Ltd
v
Power and Water Authority
(2004) ATPR ¶42-021 and
ACCC
v
Baxter Healthcare Pty Ltd
(2006) ATPR ¶42-128, and concluded that:
• the activities of the Department of Public Works in letting contracts on behalf of other government agencies did not have the character of a business and did not amount to carrying on a business, and
• in any event, the transaction between the Department of Public Works and its agencies fell within the exclusion in s 2C(1)(c)(i), which provides that a transaction involving only persons who are all acting for the Crown in the same right does not amount to carrying on a business.
The application of principles of Crown immunity under the TP Act is currently being considered by the High Court pursuant to the ACCC’s appeal of findings by the Full Federal Court that Baxter Healthcare was protected from the operation of the TP Act in its dealing with state purchasing authorities.
Eden Construction Pty Ltd
v
State of New South Wales (No 2)
[2007] FCA 689.
*Senior Associate in the competition law group at Mallesons Stephen Jaques in Sydney, specialising in competition litigation and enforcement.
ACCESS
Virgin Blue withdraws notification of access dispute
Virgin Blue Airlines Pty Limited (Virgin Blue) has withdrawn its notification of an access dispute with Sydney Airport Corporation Limited (SACL) under the access arbitration provisions in Pt IIIA of the Trade Practices Act 1974.
Virgin Blue lodged a written notice with the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) on 22 May 2007 following negotiated commercial settlement of the dispute.
Virgin Blue notified the ACCC of an access dispute with SACL on 29 January 2007, and an arbitration related to access to the declared Airside Service began in February 2007. The dispute related to the level of, and the methodology for, calculating the price SACL was charging Virgin Blue for the use of airside services at Sydney airport .
Following Virgin Blue’s success in having services at Sydney airport declared, Pt IIIA allowed for arbitration by the ACCC if commercial negotiation failed.
ACCC Chairman Graeme Samuel has said that the outcome of this arbitration illustrates that Pt IIIA is working as intended, and that the regulatory framework provides a useful backdrop that supports effective commercial negotiations.
Source: ACCC Media release MR 130/07, 24 May 2007.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Competition notice — was the ACCC entitled to issue it?
In late 2005, Telstra announced that it was increasing the price to consumers of one of its retail residential access services, known as HomeLine Part, which is a bundle of line rental with local call services only. Customers who acquire HomeLine Part from Telstra can then pre-select other telephony services (national long distance, international and fixed-to-mobile calls) from another telecommunications carrier. Telstra also announced that it was increasing the price it charged its wholesale customers for its wholesale residential access service, known as Home Access. Wholesale customers who purchase Home Access can on-sell it to consumers in competition with the retail access services of Telstra and other telecommunications suppliers. The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission was informed of each of these changes prior to their announcement.
On 22 December 2005, the ACCC issued Telstra with a notice under s 151AKA(10) of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act) of its proposal to issue a Pt A competition notice under s 151AKA(2) of the TP Act (Consultation Notice). The Consultation Notice alleged that Telstra’s pricing conduct constituted a taking advantage of Telstra’s substantial degree of power in the market for wholesale local services (the supply of access services and local calls to wholesale customers), with a likely effect of substantially lessening competition in the retail fixed voice services market because of the “price squeeze” between the wholesale price and the retail price.
On 12 April 2006, the ACCC issued Telstra with a Pt A competition notice alleging that Telstra had taken advantage of its market power with a likely effect in the retail market for any one or more of the fixed voice services (being local, fixed-to-mobile, national long distance and international calls) by preventing Telstra’s rivals from competing for “lower spend customers” in that market (Competition Notice).
Telstra commenced proceedings seeking review of the ACCC’s “decisions” to issue the Consultation Notice and the Competition Notice, and review of conduct engaged in by the ACCC for the purpose of making those decisions.
Optus relied on the Competition Notice in a separate proceeding, for which the Competition Notice was a precondition to the availability of the relief sought under s 151CC and 151CE of the TP Act, and was joined as a respondent to the proceedings.
The ACCC accepted that its decision to issue a competition notice was reviewable pursuant to s 5 of the Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977 (ADJR Act) and s 39B of the Judiciary Act 1903. However, it put in issue whether its decision to issue the Consultation Notice involved a decision or conduct for the purposes of s 5 and 6 of the ADJR Act or s 39B of the Judiciary Act, arguing that while it is a step taken under the TP Act, it is determinative of nothing and does not confer, alter or otherwise affect legal rights or obligations. Telstra submitted that the ACCC’s decision to issue the Consultation Notice depended on the exercise of a specific statutory power, and that, as it was a precondition to the issue of a Competition Notice, it had operative effect and impacted directly on Telstra’s legal rights and obligations, and was therefore reviewable under both the ADJR Act and the Judiciary Act.
As to the validity of the Consultation Notice and the Competition Notice, Telstra argued that they were invalid for uncertainty as they failed to specify the type or kind of anti-competitive conduct that has been engaged in or to identify what was to be done to avoid engaging in such conduct. In particular, Telstra argued that the notices provided an inadequate description of the market in which Telstra was said to have market power or how it was said to be taking advantage of its power in that market. Telstra also argued that the Competition Notice did not comply with the requirements of s 151AK(2) as it failed to say why and in what way each of the forms of conduct in the notice were anti-competitive.
Telstra also submitted that the Competition Notice differed in substance from the Consultation Notice such that s 151AKA(10) was not satisfied and therefore, the ACCC was not entitled to issue the Competition Notice.
In addition, Telstra sought a declaration that it was entitled to reasons for the ACCC’s decision to issue the Consultation Notice under s 13(1) of the ADJR Act.
Finally, Telstra argued that s 151AKA(10) does not displace the ACCC’s obligation of natural justice or procedural fairness, and that the ACCC failed to accord Telstra procedural fairness in connection with the issue of the Consultation and Competition Notices.
The application was granted in part.
In assessing whether the ACCC was entitled to issue a competition notice, the court found that the Competition Notice differed in substance from the Consultation Notice in the kind of anti-competitive conduct it described. Accordingly, the ACCC was not entitled to issue the Competition Notice.
However, the court held that Telstra was not entitled, under s 13(1) of the ADJR Act, to reasons for the ACCC’s “decision” to issue the Consultation Notice as it was not a “decision” under s 5 of the ADJR Act. Nor was it entitled to reasons for the ACCC’s decision to issue the Competition Notice as it was a decision within the terms of Sch 2(f) of the ADJR Act, being a decision “in connection with the institution or conduct of proceedings”.
The court also found that Telstra was denied an opportunity to respond to the new kind of conduct described in the Competition Notice and was therefore denied procedural fairness and natural justice both under the TP Act and at common law.
Telstra Corporation Limited
v
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (No 2)
(2007) ATPR ¶42-158.
ACCC UPDATE
Consumer policy inquiry: ACCC lodges submission
In December 2006, the Treasurer announced that the Productivity Commission would undertake an inquiry into Australia’s consumer policy framework and its administration.
On 29 May 2007, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) lodged its submission to the Productivity Commission’s inquiry.
The ACCC’s submission provides an overview of the Trade Practices Act 1974 (TP Act) and its role in fair trading and consumer protection law, and makes a number of recommendations about how the laws could be improved including:
• the introduction of civil pecuniary penalties and banning orders for breaches of the consumer protection and fair trading provisions of the TP Act
• amendments to the Act to reduce administrative burdens associated with obtaining redress for consumers
• enhancing the ACCC’s investigative tools, in particular by enabling it to issue notices to traders requiring them to provide substantiation of advertising claims and allowing it to use its existing s 155 investigation and evidence gathering powers in certain circumstances, and
• development of uniform consumer protection and fair trading laws across states, territories and the Commonwealth, and improving the level of cooperation between Commonwealth, state and territory agencies in administering those laws.
The ACCC’s submission is available on the ACCC website at www.accc.gov.au .
Source: ACCC Media release MR 133/07, 29 May 2007.
GPs given the nod to set fees
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) has issued a determination authorising certain general practitioners (GPs) to agree on the fees they charge their patients and to collectively negotiate with hospitals for the provision of Visiting Medical Officer (VMO) services.
In 2002, the ACCC granted authorisation to the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) for GPs intra-practice price setting arrangements. The authorisation concerns GPs in a single practice operating as a team.
The RACGP has sought renewal of the authorisation and its extension to allow GPs in particular practices to collectively negotiate with public hospitals regarding the terms and conditions, including price, of their VMO contracts.
The ACCC is satisfied that the arrangements are likely to result in a net benefit to the public. The proposed arrangements are consistent with a team approach to patient care and are likely to result in future efficiency gains in negotiations with hospitals.
The ACCC considers that the arrangements are likely to generate some public benefit by assisting the recruitment and retention of GPs in rural Australia; an important issue in light of current medical workforce shortages in rural Australia.
The ACCC considers that any detriments from the arrangements are likely to be limited. In particular, patient fees remain constrained by competition between practices and GPs are free to bulk bill or offer discounts for their services on an individual basis.
The ACCC notes that public hospitals are not compelled to enter into collective bargaining arrangements with GPs and the bargaining groups are confined to single GP practices.
The ACCC has authorised the arrangements for a period of four years. The ACCC’s determination is available from the ACCC website, www.accc.gov.au , under “Authorisations”.
Source: ACCC Media release MR 126/07, 24 May 2007.
LEGISLATION UPDATE
Amendment to Trade Practices Act
The Trade Practices Act 1974 has been amended by the Broadcasting Legislation Amendment (Digital Radio) Act 2007 (Act 68/2007) (Digital Radio Act).
The Digital Radio Act was assented to on 28 May 2007.
Schedule 1 commenced on 29 May 2007. Schedule 2 will commence either:
(a) immediately after the commencement of Sch 1 to this Act, or
(b) immediately after the commencement of s 155AAA of the Trade Practices Act 1974
whichever comes later. However, the provision(s) do not commence at all if the event mentioned in para (b) does not occur.
Sections 1–3 and remainder commenced on 28 May 2007.
The Digital Radio Act implements the government’s policy framework for the introduction of digital radio services in Australia. It is intended to implement the framework for digital radio broadcasting and transmission provided for through the announced policy framework.
The Digital Radio Act also amends the Broadcasting Services Act 1992 and the Radiocommunications Act 1992.
IMPORTANT DISCLAIMER. No person should rely on the contents of this  publication without first obtaining advice from a qualified professional  person. This publication is sold on the terms and understanding that (1) the  authors, consultants and editors are not responsible for the results of any  actions taken on the basis of information in this publication, nor for any  error in or omission from this publication; and (2) the publisher is not  engaged in rendering legal, accounting, professional or other advice or  services. The publisher, and the authors, consultants and editors, expressly  disclaim all and any liability and responsibility to any person, whether a  purchaser or reader of this publication or not, in respect of anything, and of  the consequences of anything, done or omitted to be done by any such person in  reliance, whether wholly or partially, upon the whole or any part of the  contents of this publication. Without limiting the generality of the above, no  author, consultant or editor shall have any responsibility for any act or  omission of any other author, consultant or editor.
© 2007 CCH AUSTRALIA LIMITED
101 Waterloo Road, North Ryde, NSW 2113.
Postal address: GPO Box 4072, Sydney, NSW 2001.
Document Exchange: Sydney DX 812.
Head Office North Ryde Ph: (02) 9857 1300
Fax: (02) 9857 1600
CCH Customer Support Ph: 1 300 300 224
Fax: 1 300 306 224. For the cost of a local call anywhere within Australia.
All rights reserved. No part of this work covered by copyright  may be reproduced or copied in any form or by any means (graphic, electronic  or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, recording taping, or  information retrieval systems) without the written permission of the  publisher.