A SCHOOLBOY BEATEN TO DEATH BY HIS SCHOOLMASTER.
Please wait.
Loading browse data...
I am browsing for
Automatically move the image to show word locations
Word properties
Line below
{LINE BELOW}
NOTE: Only lines in the current paragraph are shown.
Click on current line of text for options.
Cancel
Paragraph operations are made directly in the full article text panel located to the left.
Paragraph operations include:
Zone operations are made directly in the full article text panel located to the left.
Zone operations include:
Adjust the order of zones
Add new blank zone
Authors
Abstract
The trial of Mr. Hopley, schoolmaster, of Eastbourne, for the manslaughter of Reginald Cancellor, one of his pupils, took place before Lord Chief Justice Cockburn, at Lewes, on the 23rd of July.
The
Cancel
Di 11 Sep 1860 - The South Australian Advertiser (Adelaide, SA : 1858 - 1889)
Page 2 - A SCHOOLBOY BEATEN TO DEATH BY HIS SCHOOLMASTER.
A SCHOOLBOY BEATEN TO DEATH
BY HIS SCHOOLMASTER.
The trial of Mr. Hopley, schoolmaster, of East-
bourne, for the manslaughter of Reginald Cancellor,
one of his pupils, took place before Lord Chief Jus-
tice Cockburn, at Lewes, on the 23rd of July.
The
evidence for the prosecution, given at the trial, was
of a most revolting character, and revealed, on the
part of Hopley, a system of cold-blooded brutality
which has rarely been surpassed in the annals of crime.
Reginald Channell Cancellor was the son of a man
of fair position in society.
"His father sought out for
him a school of reputation and a master who had the
credit of being a man of high attainments and a suc-
cessful teacher of youth.
Mr. Hopley was to receive
£180 a year with his pupil, and there was every in-
centive, therefore, to the tutor to endeavour to do his
best by the boy.
Unfortunately, he did not under-
stand the lad who had come under his control.
Young Cancellor was labouring under disease.
He
had water on the brain.
He was stolid and stupid,
and he could not learn.
He was silent when asked
to repeat a sum in arithmetic which he had just been
taught, and he did not know, or, as his schoolmaster
thought, affected not to know, the difference between
a sixpence and a shilling.
Mr. Hopley decided that
the case was one of obduracy, and flogged the boy.
At first he seems to have considered this a matter of
duty ; but, as the contest went on, there appears too
much reason to believe that it became a question of
temper with the schoolmaster, and that violence and
cruelty were the effect of vindictiveness and irritation.
One morning young Cancellor was found dead in
his bed.
The body was carefully covered over.
It
had white kid gloves upon its hands, and long stock-
ings drawn far up over the thighs ; nothing was
visible but the face.
Hopley suggested that the boy
had died of disease of the heart, and wished a certifi-
cate from the surgeon and immediate burial.
At one
moment it appeared likely that the whole affair would
be hushed up.
But mysterious stories of midnight
shrieks and bloodstained instruments of punishment
began to be whispered about.
The servants had seen
blood upon the linen in Mrs. Hopley's room, and had
heard sounds which convinced them that the miser-
able wife had spent the night in the frightful task of
preparing the body to pass a superficial investigation,
and in getting rid of the traces of violence which
would testify against her husband.
Then came the
real investigation.
The gloves and the stockings
were stripped off, and the legs and the arms of the
corpse were found to be coated with extravasated
blood, " the cellular membranes under the skin of the
thighs were reduced to a perfect jelly ; in fact, all
torn to pieces and lacerated by the blows that had
been inflicted.
" There were two holes in the right
leg about the size of a sixpence and an inch deep,
which appeared to have been made by jabbing a
thick stick into the flesh.
The appearance was that
of a human creature who had been mangled by an
infuriated and merciless assailant.
All these appear-
ances coincided but too faithfully with what was now
learnt of the conduct of the schoolmaster.
A servant
girl who had slept next to the pupil-room haard the
boy crying and screaming under blows and her
master talking and beating.
She listened at 10
o'clock, when the torture was going on, and she
awoke at 12, and it was still proceeding.
Then the
cries suddenly ceased, and nothing after was heard
during that unquiet night but the stealthy move-
ments of the wife, who was, with womanly devotion,
doing her fearful task of hiding the traces of the
tragedy.