MAR
APR
JUN
19
2015
2016
2017
301 captures
23 Feb 01 - 15 Sep 16
Close Help
How it Started?
Custom Search
California Gold Rush:
Events of the Gold Rush
How it Started?
Rush for Gold !
Overland Trail
Coming by Sea
Mining for Gold
Life of a 49er
Foreign Miners
Law and Order
After the Gold Rush
Cal Gold Rush Videos
Social Studies Main Index
 
Rumors of gold in California had existed for years before the           Gold Rush. But it wasn't until gold was discovered at Sutter's         mill that the Gold Rush began.
On this Page:
How it Started?
Sutter and             Marshall
Books on the California Gold Rush
Links to other Sites on the California Gold Rush
How it Started?
Top of Page
Sutter's Fort
(Source: Library of Congress)
John Sutter was a Swiss             emigrant who arrived in California in 1839. He became a             Mexican citizen and received a land grant of 50,000 acres             in Sacramento Valley.
He built Sutter's Fort at the               site of present day Sacramento. At Sutter's Fort he               developed farming and other businesses. Sutter's Fort               became a rest station for travelers and immigrants to               California. Above right is a picture of Sutter's Fort at               the time of the Gold Rush.
In 1847 John Sutter hired James Marshall to build a               sawmill at a site named Coloma. At the right, below, is a               picture of the Mill at Coloma.
Sutter's Mill
(Source: Library of Congress)
On January 4, 1848, James             Marshall picked up a piece of metal at the mill that             looked like gold. He took the metal to Sutter. They             tested it and confirmed that it was gold.
Sutter was               afraid that the discovery of gold would take his workers               away from the fields. He was also concerned that gold               would bring prospectors onto his land. He asked Marshall               and the others working at the mill to keep the gold a               secret.
But word got out! By late 1848, word had spread across               the country. On December 5, 1848, President James Polk               speaking to Congress confirmed accounts of gold. The               discovery of gold in California became national news.
 
Sutter and Marshall
Top of Page
Picture of John Sutter             (Source: Library of Congress)
Picture of             James Marshall (Source: Library of Congress)
 
Books on the California Gold Rush
Top of Page
 
Books on the California Gold Rush
 
 
 
Links             to other sites on the California Gold Rush
Top of Page
For a daily history lesson see AccentHistory.net
http://www.accenthistory.net
California Natural Resources
http://ceres.ca.gov/ceres/calweb/
geology/goldrush.html
Eyewitness to History
http://www.eyewitnesstohistory.com/
californiagoldrush.htm
 
Top of Page
 
Copyright © 1998-2012 Kidport