Feb
MAR
Apr
21
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
21 Mar 16 - 21 Mar 16
Close Help
this day in history
historical facts
did you know?
travel tips
video
jitt.travel
JiTT cities among the top 50 best cities to live in
A beginner’s guide to JiTT.travel – Milan Edition
JiTT.travel is running for National Public Champion at the European Business Awards
traveling stories
#1 Top Travel Chill-Out Spots by Alex
A world away
Itchy feet
did you know?
Celebrating St. Patrick’s Day in NYC
20 Philadelphia Firsts
Philadelphia: 150 years of American architecture
travel tips
Easter Markets
Celebrating St. Patrick’s Day in NYC
#1 Top Travel Chill-Out Spots by Alex
Travel Tech
A personal touch to your travel experience
Taking baggage handling to the next level
NYC to replace phone booths for other communication technology
By Ana this day in history
December 14, 2015
Roald Amundsen Reaches South Pole
South Pole Flags. © Darryn Schneider | Dreamstime.com
Norwegian explorer Roald Amundsen was the first person to reach the South Pole, on 14 December 1911. He led the first expedition to reach the geographic South Pole five weeks ahead of a British party led by Robert Falcon Scott.
Amundsen’s plans had originally focused on the Arctic and the conquest of the North Pole, but the expedition was suspended in 1909 when he learned that the rival American explorers Frederick Cook and Robert E. Peary both claimed to have reached the North Pole.
In June 1910 Amundsen decided to reroute and instead sailed for Antarctica with the aim of reaching the South Pole, where the English explorer Robert F. Scott was also headed. Nearly six months later, the expedition arrived at a large inlet called the Bay of the Whales, where Amundsen established his base camp.
In October the team set off using sledges and dogs. On 14 December 1911 the expedition team arrived at the Pole and returned safely to base camp in late January. Amundsen won the race and preceded Scott’s expedition by over a month. On his return journey, Scott and his companions faced particularly harsh conditions and perished due to exhaustion, starvation and extreme cold.
Amundsen later made attempts to become the first explorer to fly over the North Pole but fell short of his goal and was apparently preceded by American explorer Richard E. Byrd, although these claims have been recently questioned.
In 1928, Amundsen disappeared during a rescue mission in the Arctic and the bodies were never recovered.
Tags
Antarctic Expedition Roald Amundsen South Pole
Share on
Facebook
Twitter
Pinterest
Google +
LinkedIn
Email
Bio
Latest Posts
Ana
Ana loves traveling, reading about traveling, and writing about traveling. Sometimes we think she needs to expand her range of interests, but then she travels some more and has the most fantastic stories to tell!
Latest Posts By Ana
Easter Markets
10 Great Spring Destinations
A world away
Previous articleThe Council of Trent Begins
Next articleLeaning Tower of Pisa reopens
You may also like
First Ball Drop
Beyond the Milky Way
London blitzed
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
Comment
Name *
Email *
Website
Social
7161likes
1225followers
657followers
Follow us
Follow @jitt_guide
Featured Posts
travel tips Easter Markets
did you know? , travel tips Celebrating St. Patrick’s Day in NYC
travel tips , traveling stories #1 Top Travel Chill-Out Spots by Alex
Authors
Cristina Baptista
Rafael Vigário
Filipe Penicheiro
Yuan Tian
Ana Sofia Amorim
Joana Sobral
Karl Smyth
Alexandre Pinto
Rui Castro
Topics
apps architecture art business cinema crafts & design culture food heritage literature music nature politics science sports technology tourism
Podcasts
More Stories
Bob Dylan’s first gig
On this day in 1961, Bob Dylan plays his first major gig in New York City. He had just arrived in town a few…
Video
A beginner’s guide to JiTT.travel - Milan Edition
About Journal
The most important bag you can take on your trip is surely our mind. The JiTT Journal is your perfect travel retailer: you can pick up practical advice, cultural information and to find the most exciting destinations and travel choices you can do to make your life the perfect remedy against boredom.
Latest Posts
Easter Markets
Celebrating St. Patrick’s Day in NYC
#1 Top Travel Chill-Out Spots by Alex
Newsletter
JiTT.travel Cities
amsterdam barcelona beijing berlin boston istanbul lisbon london los angeles milan moscow munich new york paris rio de janeiro rome san francisco são paulo st. petersburg sydney tokyo vienna
Powered by JiTT.travel
Back to top
Subscribe to our newsletter
×