The 15 Most Brutal Methods Of Execution Of All Time
Rep Power: 824
The 15 Most Brutal Methods Of Execution Of All Time
Most people hope they'll die by passing in their sleep, in a peaceful setting, or maybe surrounded by loved ones. But for the victims of these 15 executions, that couldn't be further from reality. Whether it's being set on fire inside of a tire or having your limbs slowly cut off, these deaths are sure to make you cringe. I'd say "enjoy", but that would be a little weird. Instead, let's just say, try not to yak on your keyboard!
15. Buried Alive
Being buried alive starts out our list of executions. Dating back to times B.C., this punishment has been used for individuals as well as groups. The victim is usually tied up and then placed in a hole and buried. One of the most recent and disturbing uses of this form of execution was the Nanjing Massacre during World War II, when Japanese soldiers buried groups of Chinese civilians alive in what was referred to as the "Ten Thousand Corpse Ditch".
14. Snake Pit
One of the oldest forms of torture and execution, snake pits were a very common form of capital punishment. Convicts were cast into a deep pit with venomous snakes, dying after the irritated and poorly fed snakes attacked them. Several famous leaders have been said to die this way, including Ragnar Lodbrok, the Viking warlord, and Gunnar the king of Burgundy. Some variation on the traditional snake pit is being thrown into a small pool of water containing water snakes.
13. The Spanish Tickler
This torture device was commonly used in Europe during the Middle Ages. Used to tear open the victim's skin, this weapon could rip through anything, including muscle and bone. The victim was tied up naked, sometimes in public, and then the torturers begin mutilating them. Usually starting on the limbs and working inward, the neck and face were always saved for last.
12. Slow Slicing
Ling Chi, translated as "slow slicing" or "the lingering death" was described as the death by a thousand cuts. Practiced from 900 AD to 1905, this form of torture and execution is similar to The Five Pains, but drawn out over a much longer period of time. The torturer slowly cuts and removes several body parts, extending the victims life and torture as long as possible. According to Confucian principle, a body that is cut into pieces cannot be whole in the spiritual afterlife, making the form of execution one that still tortures the victim in the afterlife.
11. Burning at the Stake
Death by burning has been used as a form of capital punishment for centuries, often associated with crimes such as treason and witchcraft. Today it is considered cruel and unusual punishment, but before the 18th century, being burned on the stake was common practice. The victim is tied to a large stake, frequently in the center of town or anywhere with onlookers and then lit on fire. It is considered one of the slowest ways to die.
10. Necklacing
Commonly practiced in South Africa, Necklacing is unfortunately still quite common today. Necklacing consists of a rubber tire, filled with gasoline, being forced around the victim's chest and arms, and then being set on fire. Necklacing essentially causes the body to be turned into a melted mess, which is why it comes in at number 10 on our list.
9. Execution by Elephant
In South and Southeast Asia, the Elephant has been a method of capital punishment for thousands of years. The animals were trained to execute two ways. Slowly, in a prolonged manner, dismembering and torturing or by Crushing, which killed the victim nearly instantly. Usually employed by royalty, these elephant assassins only heightened the fear of royalty to the common people, proving that they even had the ability to control wild animals. The concept was eventually adopted and finessed by the Roman military to deal with deserting soldiers.
8. The Five Pains
This form of Chinese capital punishment is a relatively easy concept to grasp. It starts with the victims nose being cut off, then one hand and one foot, and finally, the victim is castrated and cut in half across the waist. Inventor of this punishment Li Si, a Chinese Prime Minister, was eventually tortured and then executed this way.
UNITED STATES COAST GUARD.
Anything and everything you have heard regarding my involvment with NASA is accurate.
-Evan Centopani
Rep Power: 824
7. Colombian Necktie
This method of execution is one of the goriest. The victim's throat is slashed, often with a knife but really any sharp object would do, and then their tongue is pulled out through the open wound. During La Violencia, a Colombian period of history fraught with killing, this was the most common form of execution. It is used mainly to intimidate others who encounter the body after the fact.
6. Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered
The penalty for high treason in England, to be hanged, drawn and quartered was a common occurrence during medieval times. Although it was abolished in 1814, this form of execution was responsible for hundreds, perhaps even thousands, of deaths. The process was as follows. First, the victim is dragged on a wooden frame, called a hurdle, to the place of the execution. Second, the victim is hanged by the neck for a short period of time until nearly dead (hanged). Third, the disembowelment and castration occur, where afterward, the entrails and genitalia are burned in front of the victim (drawn). Finally, the body is divided into four separate parts and beheaded (quartered).
5. Cement shoes
Introduced by the American Mafia, this method of execution involves placing the victim's feet inside of cinder blocks and then filling them with wet cement and then throwing him or her into the water. This form of execution is still practiced today, and even created the term "someone who sleeps with the fishes" as a euphemism for the dead.
4. Guillotine
The guillotine is one of the most notorious forms of execution. Made up of a razor sharp blade attached to a rope, the victims head was placed in the middle of the frame and then the blade dropped with efficiency, causing the person to be decapitated almost instantly. The guillotine is a seemingly humane method of execution until you consider that people potentially are still alive for a few moments following the act. Crowds have reported that people who had been guillotined would blink their eyes or mouth words shortly after their heads had been cut off. Experts theorized that the swiftness of the blade had little impact on the brain, and didn't cause loss of consciousness. One doctor even reported witnessing a man's execution, and when he called the prisoner's name after his head was detached, the prisoner made eye contact with him, even focusing his pupils. It must be pretty weird to know that your head is no longer attached to your body!
3. Republican Marriage
The Republican Marriage might not be the most gruesome death on this list, but it is certainly one of the most interesting. Originating in France, this form of execution was common in Revolutionary France. It involved tying together two naked people, a male and female usually of a similar age, and drowning them. In some cases, usually where water wasn't available, the couple would be run through with a sword.
2. Crucifixion
This ancient method of execution is one of the most well known methods, obviously mainly due to the execution of Jesus Christ. Crucifixion consists of the victims hands and feet being nailed into a wooden cross and then being hoisted into the air. The victim is then left to hang there until death, which usually took days, and often meant dying of thirst before anything else.
1. The Brazen Bull
The Brazen Bull, sometimes known as the Sicilian Bull is one of the cruelest methods of torture and execution out there. Designed in ancient Greece, solid brass was cast into the shape of a hollow bull, with a door on the side that opened and latched. To begin the execution, the victim was placed inside of the brass bull and a fire was set underneath. The fire was heated until the metal was literally yellow, causing the victim to "roast to death". Yum. The bull was designed so that the screams of the victim would come out sounding musical for the enjoyment of the executioner. Naturally enough, the inventor of this form of punishment ended up being executed inside of the Bull, which was all too predictable. You live by the horns, you die by the horns. While this is a tough list to rank, we feel comfortable putting The Brazen Bull in the top spot.
UNITED STATES COAST GUARD.
Anything and everything you have heard regarding my involvment with NASA is accurate.
-Evan Centopani
Being mod negged should be on that list too
UNITED STATES COAST GUARD.
Anything and everything you have heard regarding my involvment with NASA is accurate.
-Evan Centopani
Location: Huntington Beach, California, United States
Stats: 6'1", 249 lbs
neck tie for the win!
10-20-2009, 01:49 PM #5
Interesting list... Had never heard of the bull one before.
10-20-2009, 01:49 PM #6
That tire necklace sounds brutal....
"Limitations are for people that have them and excuses are for people that need them."
US Army Firefighter
2014 MISC Bench Press Competition 1st Place Winner 425lbs@198 BW
10-20-2009, 01:50 PM #7
very interesting.
-Commander of the Infidel Alliance.
They say the only way to kill a lion is a rear naked choke, me personally I would just kick it in the head.
-Bas Rutten
Whoever appeals to the law against his fellow man is either a fool or a coward
Whoever can not take care of himself without that law is both
10-20-2009, 01:50 PM #8
Is this list supposed to be in order? cause if so, it's pretty crappy
S&P  || Orlando Magic
Is this list supposed to be in order? cause if so, it's pretty crappy
yeah i know, i didnt make it
but also, what you think is the worst has a lot to do with what fears you have, and what fears or phobias the guy who made the list has
UNITED STATES COAST GUARD.
Anything and everything you have heard regarding my involvment with NASA is accurate.
-Evan Centopani
Posts: 8,113
Rep Power: 3912
brazen bull has always been my number one least favorite way to die, necklacing and burned at the stake are up there
10-20-2009, 01:53 PM #11
Location: Deatsville, Alabama, United States
Age: 28
Well I suppose everyone has there own take on brutal death.
10-20-2009, 01:54 PM #12
Rep Power: 0
damn people obsessed with burning people
those werent to bad compared to some of the torture methods on here ive read before.
10-20-2009, 01:54 PM #13
Location: Blue Lakes, Quebec, Canada
Age: 26
Here's another 10 worst  TORTURE methods
no hijack brah
No.10 - Keelhauling
Keelhauling is the pirate torture you endure when you haven’t had the good fortune to walk the plank. Tied to a rope and pulley, the victim is dragged back and forth underneath the ship. The sharp errata under the boat rubs the victim's naked flesh raw, but drowning should come to save them rather quickly.
No.9 - Rat Torture
Described as both “rat torture” and “rat excitation,” these techniques employ rats to conveniently exploit the common human phobia toward rodents. The inquisitor out to get a confession places a few rats in a bucket, blocks the vermin's escape with the victim's stomach, then heats up the exposed end of the bucket to annoy the rats. Whatever method is used, the end result is always the same: Hungry rats, excited by fire, only have one escape path: they must burrow through the poor victim's flesh. While references to rat torture can be found in literature (Orwell’s 1984 and Joyce’s Finnegan’s Wake), historic examples are scant.
No.8 - Crocodile Shears
Crocodile shears are just how they sound: two iron-cast sides of a tube, the insides of which feature rows of spikes which are then heated by the torturer and placed on certain appendages. And here's where it gets really ugly: The crocodile shears are clamped onto the victim's penis, and with only a modicum of applied tension, they slowly and painfully separate him from his smoldering manhood. Depending on factors like blood loss and infection, death is hardly a certainty -- a point which surely contributes to the torture
No.7 - The Two-Man Saw
The two-man saw involves stripping the victim naked and stringing them upside-down by their heels with their arms strapped behind them. Two torturers then assumed each side of a large saw placed between the naked victim's legs and then begin to saw through your torso. With the blood in your body gathering in your head and torso, consciousness could presumably be sustained until the saw reaches the victim's heart.
No.6 - The Head Crusher
The head crusher technique requires some morbid hardware in the form of a metal bowl for the top of the head, equipped with a large screw on top for torque and a chin plate to keep you immobile -- torturous headgear that has crushing effects. The victim's head is pinned between the bowl and the plate and the torturer then turns the screw at his own leisure and the victim's pain. The metal headgear begins to compress and the victim's teeth shatter and their eyes pop from their sockets -- but death doesn't come until much later on, unfortunately.
No.5 - Iron Maiden
No, not the band -- the iron maiden is actually an iron chamber about the same size as a Porta-Potty, but without any of the appeal. The victim is placed in the seemingly innocent iron maiden chamber. Only once inside would the victim realize that the iron maiden is armed with spikes on all the inner walls. When the door is closed on the victim, the spikes drive deeply -- but not too deeply -- into his eyes, chest and back.
for pic illustrations
No.4 - The Stake
Just how it sounds; the stake is little more than a life-sized iron skewer heated by hot coals, used to impale its victims. Featuring all the public appeal of a crucifixion without the symbolism, the stake is favorably threaded through the victim's hog-tied torso. Minimizing blood loss, the skewered individual could maintain some level of consciousness for days.
No.3 - The Pope's Pear
Also known as the Pear of Anguish, the Choke-Pear or simply the Pear, the business end of this hand-held device bears slight resemblance to a pear with a handle on a screw at the other end. A woman who slept with Satan would find the pear end in her vagina, a man who slept with another man would find it in his anus, and a heretic, in his mouth. Once inside, the torturer would then turn the handle to expand the pear, which blossomed like a flower with three mutilating, razor-sharp petals.
No.2 - The Wheel
When it came to breaking the condemned, few techniques were as prevalent -- or as grievous -- as the wheel. First, most of the victim's limbs and joints were broken, then they were threaded, naked, into the spokes of a large wooden wheel. Hoisted up in a public place, the victim waited to die while subject to the elements, humiliation and ridicule.
No.1 - Scaphism
First mentioned by Plutarch as a Persian technique, scaphism is a quiet testament to mankind's gruesome worst. If a more heinous or outrageous technique exists, we'd rather not know about it.
The victim is tied naked to a boat, face up. They would have already been force-fed enough milk and honey to induce severe diarrhea -- torturous enough -- but it gets worse. Honey was then applied to areas like the groin and the armpits before the victim's vessel was set adrift in a stagnant pond. The diarrhea and the honey would attract insects, which fed off of the victim and eventually began to breed from within their flesh.
I love Nissan ...*|Misc Strength Crew|*...>October 16th 2009, Never Forget <
..........ZachSmash is my brother.
Here's another 10 worst  TORTURE methods
no hijack brah
No.10 - Keelhauling
Keelhauling is the pirate torture you endure when you haven?t had the good fortune to walk the plank. Tied to a rope and pulley, the victim is dragged back and forth underneath the ship. The sharp errata under the boat rubs the victim's naked flesh raw, but drowning should come to save them rather quickly.
The victim is tied naked to a boat, face up. They would have already been force-fed enough milk and honey to induce severe diarrhea -- torturous enough -- but it gets worse. Honey was then applied to areas like the groin and the armpits before the victim's vessel was set adrift in a stagnant pond. The diarrhea and the honey would attract insects, which fed off of the victim and eventually began to breed from within their flesh.
you win