Brutal Execution methods Of History
The Most Brutal Execution Methods In History That Will Make Your Skin Crawl.
10.
Guillotine
One of the most notorious forms of executions, the guillotine was made of a razor sharp blade attached to a rope.
The victim’s head was placed in the middle of the frame as the blade dropped, severing the victim’s head from the body.
Since the decapitation was considered to be an instant and painless event (at least less painful than the other torture methods), it was often considered the most humane method of execution.
9.
Death by Boiling
This was an unusually cruel method of execution.
There is plenty of evidence that it was practiced throughout human history.
Archaeologists have found human bones in cooking pots and hearths in China which were found to be around 500,000 years old.In this the victim was immersed in boiling water, oil or tar until dead.
Imagine the fear the prisoner felt when they were taken to this deadly big pot to suffer their horrible fate.
8.
Disembowelment
This method was used to punish thieves and those accused of adultery.
Some or all the vital organs were removed one by one from the body, mainly from the abdomen.
Sources say it was practiced in England, the Netherlands, Belgium and in Japan.it was a ritualized suicide method for Samurai, referred as “seppuku”, in which two cuts across the abdomen were made.
In another version, a fine cut was made in the victim’s gut, leaving him to catch an infection.
7.
Rat Torture
One of the most sadistic of all torture techniques involved having a cage with one open side strapped against the victim’s body.
It would then be filled with large rodents and a heating element which would be placed on the other side of the cage.
The rodents’ natural instinct led them to flee the intense heat.
In order to escape they would burrow through the victim’s body with fatal results.
6.
Breaking Wheel
In this method the Breaking Wheel ensured the victim endured as a much pain as humanly possible before eventually dying.
There were various methods of torture carried out using the Breaking Wheel.
Two of the more popular involved tying the victim’s limbs to the spokes of a wheel.
During the first method, executioners bludgeoned the victim until their eventual death.
During the second method, the wheel would turn ever so slowly while the victim’s bones broke one by one.
As if the agonizing feeling of having close to every bone broken wasn’t enough, the victim was also left attached to the wheel out in public for rats, insects, and birds to feed off.
5.
Breast Ripper
The Breast Ripper, or Iron Spider, was used on women who perpetrated unspeakable acts according to society, namely adultery and self-abortion.
Made popular in Bavaria, Germany, during the later 1500s, the Breast Ripper did just that: ripped the breasts off of a woman.
Women accused of facilitating their own miscarriage, adultery, heresy, blasphemy, or being a witch were punished using an iron instrument with four claws at the end.
After it was heated up, the device would slowly rip the breasts off the accused woman’s body.
If the woman did not die as the result of extreme blood loss, she was left horrifically disfigured for the rest of her life.
4.
Crushing
Death by crushing or pressing is a forceful execution method that has an extensive history, with several varying methods used through time.
One of them was ‘Crushing by Elephants’, which was used throughout south and south-east Asia for over 4,000 years.
Sources say it was also used by Romans as well as by the Nguyen Dynasty in Vietnam.The condemned would be tied up with his head on a stone or a slightly extruded surface.
The head was crushed by a highly trained elephant, who would slowly exert pressure on the head.
The condemned would feel all the horrors of his frightful death before taking his last breath.
3.
Death by Burning
In this method the victim’s body would burn progressively in the following sequence: calves, thighs and hands, torso and forearms, breasts, upper chest, face; and then finally death.
It was extremely painful, although sometimes the person died from carbon monoxide poisoning before the fire even touched their calves.
Pitch was also applied to the person’s body, which helped the fire to burn quicker and make the process faster.
2.
Sawing
Death by sawing was a method of execution reportedly used in different parts of the world, for example in Europe under the Roman Empire, in Spain, and in parts of Asia.
Using this method, the condemned would usually be hung upside down with the legs apart.
The saw would then slowly be driven through the entire body, eventually cutting the head in two.
The person condemned usually wouldn’t die until the saw reached the head.
1.
Slow Slicing
Around 900 AD it was a common execution method in China, until its abolition.
There it was known as ‘Ling Chi’, which means ‘The Lingering Death’ or ‘Death By a Thousand Cuts’.
The idea behind the method was to humiliate the victim with a slow and painful execution and then for the punishment to continue even after after death.The condemned person was killed using a knife.
Methodically, over an extended period of time, parts of the body were removed.
This was a public execution method used to threaten people.
Sometimes opium was also administered to prevent fainting or as an act of mercy.
Because of the severity of the punishment, it could not last longer than 15 to 20 minutes.