MAR
MAY
Jun
5
2015
2016
2017
9 captures
16 Dec 15 - 29 May 16
Close Help
Skip to main content
User menu
Login
Register
About
About us
Meet the Team
We Give Back
User Rewards
Expeditions
Interactive Map
Site Map
Ancient Origins Membership Site
Links
All Links
Ancient Places
Ancient Texts
Authors & Researchers
Human Origins
Myths & Legends
Scientific News
History & Archaeology
Space, UFO & Other Strange Phenomena - Links
Media
Gallery
Video
Books
Book Reviews
Recommended Books
Events
Tours
Events
Forums
Contact
Membership
Search
Enter your keywords
Get our Free Ebook»
Get our Free APP »
Main menu
News
General
History & Archaeology
Science & Space
Evolution & Human Origins
Mysterious Phenomena
Human Origins
Science
Religions
Folklore
Myths
Ancient Places
Europe
Asia
Americas
Australia & Oceania
Africa
Antarctica
Artifacts
Other Artifacts
Ancient Technology
Ancient Writings
History
Ancient Traditions
Important Events
Famous People
Opinion
Author Profiles
Writers' List
Guest Articles
Editorials
Unexplained
News
General
History & Archaeology
Science & Space
Evolution & Human Origins
Mysterious Phenomena
Home / News
Suggested Books
Active forum topics
Ancient Australian Aborigines connected to Lascaux Cave, France
28 April Webinar – Tales of Conspiracy, Betrayal and Cruelty
Zhuan Falun ( Turning The Law Wheel )
Please introduce yourself
technical problem
The Shigir Idol - A wodden statue twice as old as the Pyramids of Egypt
More
Suggested Books
Suggested Books
15 December, 2015 - 03:52 dhwty
Execution by Elephant: A Gory Method of Capital Punishment
(Read the article on one page)
Elephants have played a number of important roles in human history. In some cultures, the elephant is a revered creature. In Buddhism, for example, the vivid dream of Buddha’s mother which foretold her pregnancy had a white elephant in it.  Other cultures used the elephant’s great strength and power in battle, or for huge construction projects. There are many examples of these activities - ranging from Hannibal’s crossing of the Alps with his 34 African elephants in 218 BC, to the use of these creatures in the construction of Angkor Wat in the 12th century AD. However, it is perhaps less well-known that elephants were also used as deadly executioners.
Execution by Elephant in Different Societies
Execution by elephant was a form of capital punishment and a weapon of war for certain societies of the past. This method of punishment was occasionally used in the Western world, as several examples can be found in the ancient sources. For example, in the Historiae Alexandri Magni , the Roman historian Quintus Rufus Curtius wrote:
“Then Perdiccas, seeing them paralyzed and in his power, separated from the rest about thirty who had followed Meleager when he rushed forth from the first assembly which was held after the death of Alexander, and in the sight of the whole army cast them before the elephants. All were trampled to death by the feet of the beasts…”
War elephants in battle during the Carnatic Wars by Paul Philipoteaux. ( Public Domain )
Nevertheless, this was not a common method of execution in the West. On the other hand, execution by elephant was more frequently used in South and Southeast Asia, especially in India. This form of capital punishment is known also as gunga rao , and has been used since the Middle Ages.
Unsolved Mystery: Where did Hannibal get his War Elephants?
Elephant Tomb Discovered in Spain May Have Been a Temple to the God Mithras
Bestiary, The Book of Beasts: Compendiums of Medieval Monsters and Moral Lessons
The brutal Draconian laws of ancient Greece
The popularity of this mode of execution continued into the 19th century, and it was only with the increasing presence of the British in India that the popularity of this brutal penalty went into decline.
Illustration of execution by elephant in 1681 by Robert Knox. ( Public Domain )
Purpose and Methods of Execution by Elephant
The most common way that the execution by elephant was carried out was for the beasts to crush its victim to death with brute force. Apart from enemy soldiers, civilians who commit certain crimes could also be punished in this way. These crimes included theft, tax evasion and rebellion. There are many wild beasts that could be used to kill a criminal – tigers, lions, crocodiles, snakes, etc. Yet, the choice of the elephant shows that there was something unique about this creature.
Compared to many other wild animals, the elephant is considered to be a smart and easily trainable. In addition, elephants could also be taught to torture criminals, or to execute them slowly. As an example, an elephant could be commanded to break a criminal’s limbs before ending his suffering by crushing his skull.
Another example can be found in the account of François Bernier, a French traveler who witnessed an execution by elephant in Delhi during the reign of the Mughals. According to the Frenchman, the elephants were trained to slice criminals to pieces with “pointed blades fitted to their tusks”. Furthermore, the training of elephants could be used as a means of demonstrating a ruler’s control over the forces of nature.
A Mughal depiction of an execution by elephant. ( Public Domain )
Execution by Elephant in other Asian Countries
Apart from India, execution by elephant was also practiced in some other Asian countries. Like India, it was the elephant’s intelligence and brute force that were exploited to execute criminals. Yet, there were some variations in the method of execution. In neighboring Sri Lanka, for instance, elephants used during these events were said to have been fitted with sharp tips on their tusks. Instead of slicing their victims, the elephant would stab its victim, and then ‘rearrange’ its victim’s internal organs.
In the former Kingdom of Siam (now Thailand), elephants were trained to toss their victims into the air before crushing them to death. In the Kingdom of Cochinchina (southern Vietnam), on the other hand, criminals were tied to a stake, whilst an elephant would charge into them, and crush them to death.
Pages
1
2
next ›
last »
Section: 
News
History
Ancient Traditions
Tags: 
Elephant
execution
death penalty
capital punishment
India
sri lanka
Thailand
Vietnam
War
Register to become part of our active community, get updates, receive a monthly newsletter, and enjoy the benefits and rewards of our member point system OR just post your comment below as a Guest.
Your name *
E-mail *
The content of this field is kept private and will not be shown publicly.
Homepage
Notify me when new comments are posted
All comments
Replies to my comment
Subject
Comment *
More information about text formats
Plain text
No HTML tags allowed.
Web page addresses and e-mail addresses turn into links automatically.
Lines and paragraphs break automatically.
Home page
By submitting this form, you accept the Mollom privacy policy .
Related Articles on Ancient-Origins
11 March, 2016 - 14:23 valdar
Hair-Raising Tales of Paranormal Animals that Possess Humans, See Death, and Act as Messengers of the Gods
Throughout time, numerous people have declared that they had witnessed strange and inexplicable occurrences involving the ghosts of the deceased, fantastic creatures, demons, and other similar things...
Read more about Hair-Raising Tales of Paranormal Animals that Possess Humans, See Death, and Act as Messengers of the Gods
Add new comment
19 November, 2015 - 00:45 lizleafloor
Bestiary, The Book of Beasts: Compendiums of Medieval Monsters and Moral Lessons
During the Middle Ages the phoenix rose from its ashes to be reborn, dangerous dragons battled elephants to the death, and the pelican tore out its own breast to feed its young with its life’s blood—...
Read more about Bestiary, The Book of Beasts: Compendiums of Medieval Monsters and Moral Lessons
1 comment
Add new comment
21 March, 2015 - 20:37 Mark Miller
New study finds ancient humans butchered elephants with stone tools 500,000 years ago
Archaeologists working at a site in Israel have found stone tools made hundreds of thousands of years ago alongside the remains of an ancient species of elephant and other game. The researchers...
Read more about New study finds ancient humans butchered elephants with stone tools 500,000 years ago
3 comments
Add new comment
14 May, 2013 - 20:56 aprilholloway
Elephant Tomb Discovered in Spain May Have Been a Temple to the God Mithras
The Elephant's Tomb in Seville, Spain, so named because of an elephant-shaped statue found inside , may have been used to worship the God Mithras, archaeologists say. The tomb is located in the Roman...
Read more about Elephant Tomb Discovered in Spain May Have Been a Temple to the God Mithras
Add new comment
Most Read Today
The Honorable Death: Samurai and Suicide in Feudal Japan
Have Humans Always Gone to War?
Frozen in Time: Casts of Pompeii Reveal Last Moments of Volcano Victims
Researchers Believe They May Have Located a Famous Ship Once Owned by Captain Cook
Ancient Race of White Giants Described in Native Legends From Many Tribes
Why is the global climatic cataclysm of the sixth century virtually unheard of?
Most Popular
Legends
Technology
Ancient Places
Ancient Race of White Giants Described in Native Legends From Many Tribes
Several Native American tribes have passed down legends of a race of white giants who were wiped out. We’ll take a look at a few such legends, including those among the Choctaw and the Comanches of the United States down to the Manta of Peru.
The Sumerian King List still puzzles historians after more than a century of research
Ten Mythological Creatures in Ancient Folklore
The Hidden Origins of Il Separatio: Manuscripts Deemed Dangerous and Banned
Lovelock Cave: A Tale of Giants or A Giant Tale of Fiction?
Exposing the Secret History of Giants and the Underground Hyperborean Gallery in Romania
Eight Impressive but Terrifying Cases of Ancient Surgery
It is hard to fathom the way in which invasive surgery was carried out prior to the development of modern anaesthesia, but ancient people around the world have been cutting and drilling into the...
The Mystical Pentatonic Scale and Ancient Instruments, Part I: Bone Flutes
Is this a 300 million-year-old screw or just a fossilized sea creature?
From Chrome Plating to Nanotubes: The ‘Modern’ Chemistry First Used in Ancient Times
Ten amazing inventions from ancient times
150,000-Year-Old Pipes Baffle Scientists in China: Out of Place in Time?
An Example of Unity: A History of Constructing and Reconstructing Religious Sites in Azerbaijan
Modern day Azerbaijan is a country with countless religious sites, including mosques, churches and ancient temples, and for centuries the representatives of various religious beliefs have been...
The Exceptional Underwater City of Cuba: A New Theory on its Origins – Part I
The Horrifying History of the Midnight Terror Cave in Belize
Bryn Celli Ddu: Ancient Stone Circle and Passage Tomb Was for the Living and the Dead
When Ancient Masters Ruled the Earth: The Mysterious Depths of the Saint Croix Basin
Nabta Playa and the Ancient Astronomers of the Nubian Desert
Recent comments
Well that is the view that is
37 min 31 sec ago
It is exceptionally useful
40 min 10 sec ago
Kaaba
1 hour 16 min ago
WoW really. Its AMERICAN
2 hours 39 min ago
Ulfberht was made with
3 hours 1 min ago
more
Suggested Books
Top New Stories
An Example of Unity: A History of Constructing and Reconstructing Religious Sites in Azerbaijan
Modern day Azerbaijan is a country with countless religious sites, including mosques, churches and ancient temples, and for centuries the representatives of various religious beliefs have been...
Have Humans Always Gone to War?
Researchers Believe They May Have Located a Famous Ship Once Owned by Captain Cook
The Honorable Death: Samurai and Suicide in Feudal Japan
The Famous Egyptian Martyr Saint Menas and His Shrine at Abu Mina
The Mystical Pentatonic Scale and Ancient Instruments, Part I: Bone Flutes
Myths & Legends
Ancient Race of White Giants Described in Native Legends From Many Tribes
Several Native American tribes have passed down legends of a race of white giants who were wiped out. We’ll take a look at a few such legends, including those among the Choctaw and the Comanches of the United States down to the Manta of Peru.
The Sumerian King List still puzzles historians after more than a century of research
Ten Mythological Creatures in Ancient Folklore
The Hidden Origins of Il Separatio: Manuscripts Deemed Dangerous and Banned
Lovelock Cave: A Tale of Giants or A Giant Tale of Fiction?
Exposing the Secret History of Giants and the Underground Hyperborean Gallery in Romania
Human Origins
The human skull that challenges the Out of Africa theory
This is the account of the discovery of a skull that has the potential to change what we know about human evolution, and a suppression and cover-up which followed. In 1959, in an area called...
The Truth About the Holy Grail: Magical Chalices Around the World
The Incredible Powers of the Ancient Siddhars
The origins of human beings according to ancient Sumerian texts
Legendary Locks: Can Hair Act as a Sixth Sense, Protecting us from Danger?
The secret life of an ancient concubine
Ancient Technology
Eight Impressive but Terrifying Cases of Ancient Surgery
It is hard to fathom the way in which invasive surgery was carried out prior to the development of modern anaesthesia, but ancient people around the world have been cutting and drilling into the...
The Mystical Pentatonic Scale and Ancient Instruments, Part I: Bone Flutes
Is this a 300 million-year-old screw or just a fossilized sea creature?
From Chrome Plating to Nanotubes: The ‘Modern’ Chemistry First Used in Ancient Times
Ten amazing inventions from ancient times
150,000-Year-Old Pipes Baffle Scientists in China: Out of Place in Time?
Ancient Places
An Example of Unity: A History of Constructing and Reconstructing Religious Sites in Azerbaijan
Modern day Azerbaijan is a country with countless religious sites, including mosques, churches and ancient temples, and for centuries the representatives of various religious beliefs have been...
The Exceptional Underwater City of Cuba: A New Theory on its Origins – Part I
The Horrifying History of the Midnight Terror Cave in Belize
Bryn Celli Ddu: Ancient Stone Circle and Passage Tomb Was for the Living and the Dead
When Ancient Masters Ruled the Earth: The Mysterious Depths of the Saint Croix Basin
Unravelling the Tragic Story Behind the Impressive Lion Monument of Lucerne
Opinion
An Example of Unity: A History of Constructing and Reconstructing Religious Sites in Azerbaijan
Modern day Azerbaijan is a country with countless religious sites, including mosques, churches and ancient temples, and for centuries the representatives of various religious beliefs have been...
Atlantis: Examining the Legendary Tale of Plato
Is Bigfoot Real? Emerging Scientific Evidence
The Egyptian Goddess Isis, Found in India
The Realm of Poseidon: A Mythical Voyage Around the Aegean
When Ancient Masters Ruled the Earth: The Mysterious Depths of the Saint Croix Basin
Our Mission
Ancient Origins seeks to uncover, what we believe, is one of the most important pieces of knowledge we can acquire as human beings – our beginnings.
While many believe that we already hold such knowledge, our view is that there still exists a multitude of anomalies and mysteries in humanity's past that deserve further examination.
We therefore wish to foster an open community that is dedicated to investigating, understanding and explaining the origins of our species on planet earth. To this end, we aim to organize, support and even finance efforts in this direction.
Our aim is to move beyond theories and to present a thorough examination of current research and evidence and to offer alternative viewpoints and explanations to those currently held by mainstream science and archaeology.
Come with us on a journey to explore lost civilisations, sacred writings, ancient places, unexplained artefacts and scientific mysteries while we seek to reconstruct and retell the story of our beginnings.
Ancient Image Galleries
Ancient Origins © 2013 - 2015
Disclaimer  - Terms of Publication - Privacy Policy & Cookies - Advertising Policy - We Give Back - Contact us
A project of Stella Novus - Development and Customization by Novus Web Solutions
Next article