SEP
MAY
Jun
5
2015
2016
2017
17 captures
7 Sep 14 - 5 May 16
Close Help
Toggle navigation
News
Photos
Videos
Engrish
Store
Toggle navigation
Japan
China
Hong Kong
North Korea
South Korea
India
Rest of Asia
Trending Topics
Baby Born With Thirty-One Fingers and Toes - Read More
Farmer Finds Goat That Looks Like a Human Baby - Read More
Tornado Flings Girl Into Air During School Celebration - Read More
Buddhist Monks Brawl For All To See - Read More
Ronald McDonald Sculpture Arrested In China - Read More
North Korea Uses Paper Airplanes To Plan Attack - Read More
North Korea Uses Abraham Lincoln Letter To Bash Obama - Read More
New Species of Jellyfish Looks Like A UFO - Read More
Snake Silences Singing Sensation - Read More
Woman With Broken Heart Shatters Windows - Read More
Execution by Elephant: Ancient Capital Punishment in India
The death penalty is one of the oldest methods of criminal sentencing. Although different countries have had equally gruesome methods of inflicting the highest form of punishment, India had one of the most brutal methods of criminal torture: execution by elephant.
Designed to demonstrate to the people that even the awe-inspiring power of nature was under the iron grip of the emperor, execution by elephant — or gunga rao, as it’s called in India — became a choice method for capital punishment during the Middle Ages and continued well into the 19th century. Although the execution method was thought to have originated in ancient Rome, the practice of stomping the punished via elephant became popular in both western and Southeast Asia and in India. However, this method of execution declined as the British Empire grew in power.
Sources say that Hindu and Muslim leaders executed citizens for tax evasion, rebellion, and being enemy soldiers alike. Thieves and Mongol prisoners were also punished by death.
As for the elephants, they were often trained to “instantly crush [the offender] to atoms … but if it was desired to torture him, the elephant would break his limbs successively, as men are broken on the wheel,” observed Robert Kerr, a writer from the 19th century.
Crushing the victim, however, was not the only method of elephant-inflicted torture. According to François Bernier, a French traveler who witnessed such executions in the Mughal sultanate of Delhi, the elephants were also capable of slicing the prisoners to pieces “with pointed blades fitted to their tusks.”
Another traveler who visited Delhi in the year 1330, Ibn Mattuta, witnessed and recorded his account of the event, stating: “If the order was to cut him to pieces, the elephant would do so with his irons, and then throw the pieces among the assembled multitude. But if the order was to leave him, he would be left lying before the emperor, until the skin should be taken off, and stuffed with hay, and the flesh given to the dogs.”
( Source )
Bio
Twitter
Latest Posts
Marie R
A freelance writer from Puerto Rico with a love for psychology and graphic design, Marie R. also enjoys sampling food from Asian countries and remembers blueberry-flavored Japanese KitKats quite fondly. Some of her musings can be found at radio-acerola.org.
@radioacerola
Latest posts by Marie R ( see all )
Man Under Investigation for Fathering 16 Children - September 23, 2014
Cobra Exacts Revenge on Chef - September 22, 2014
Fries Not Included with These KFC Peripherals - September 21, 2014
Share this:
Facebook
Google
Twitter
Pinterest
Reddit
Related
August 31, 2014 |
by Marie R
Leave a comment
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
Comment
Your Name *
Your Email *
Your Website
Notify me of follow-up comments by email.
Notify me of new posts by email.
FOLLOW US
Popular News
Tornado Flings Girl Into Air During School Celebration
Tornadoes aren’t supposed to happen when the skies are blue and beautiful. Tell that to the students of the Yuanquan Town Elementary ...
January 1, 2010
Farmer Finds Goat That Looks Like a Human Baby
There are varieties of myths about creatures that are half goat-half human. The Greeks had satyrs, who hung around with Dionysus, the god ...
Baby Born With Thirty-One Fingers and Toes
Many children around the world learn about their ten fingers and ten toes through the nursery rhyme “This Little Piggy.” For 3-month-old ...
Buddhist Monks Brawl For All To See
One only has to say the words ‘Asian holy man’ to start people blathering about the famed Shaolin Monks. A recent video from China shows ...
Watch This
FRIENDS OF WAN
Buy from China on DHgate.com
Unbelievable.com
Asian Store Coupons
Gumship
Rocket News 24
Tokyo Desu
Walyou
China
Baby Born With Thirty-One Fingers and Toes
Buddhist Monks Brawl For All To See
Tornado Flings Girl Into Air During School Celebration
Ronald McDonald Sculpture Arrested In China
Doctor Extorts, Attacks Patient On The Operating Table
Japan
McDonald’s Adds New Giga Bite Burger
Strange Bedfellows: Japanese Tour Guides, Poop, and Paris
Pepsi Flavors You Can Only Buy In Japan
Today Is National Cat and Ninja Day In Japan
Japanese Mother Forces Daughter To Eat Thirty Pet Goldfish
Hong Kong
270 Hong Kong Couples Participate In Doggy-Style Yoga, Set World Record
The French Politely Ask You Not Pee On The Floor
The Hottest Diet In Hong Kong Might Kill You
Marriage Proposal Costs Man Nearly $52,000
Fish Bladder Corn Flakes Are Not the Breakfast of Champions
North Korea
North Korea Uses Paper Airplanes To Plan Attack
North Korea Uses Abraham Lincoln Letter To Bash Obama
North Korea Floats Poop-Filled Balloons Into South Korea
North Korean Special Forces Training Film
Kim Jung-un Loves Trees and the Execution of Officials
South Korea
South Korea Constructing Statue In Honor of Psy
North Korea Floats Poop-Filled Balloons Into South Korea
South Korean Teens Stressed Out Over Zits
South Koreans Staging Fake Funerals
South Koreans Gobble Up Videos of People Eating
Rest of Asia
New Species of Jellyfish Looks Like A UFO
Farmer Finds Goat That Looks Like a Human Baby
Snake Silences Singing Sensation
Indian Archaeologists Discover Paintings of Ancient Aliens
Meet A 9-Year-Old Boy Who Has 300 Teeth
Home
About Us
Our Authors
News
Photos
Videos
Sitemap
Disclaimer
Advertise
Privacy Policy
© Copyright 2015 WeirdAsiaNews