Apr
MAY
Jun
5
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
5 May 16 - 5 May 16
Close Help
Asphodel Meadows
Search
Primary Menu
Skip to content
Home
About
Buy my Books
WomBlogs
Search for:
Animals , Elephant , Executions
Unusual Executions – Elephant
August 7, 2012
wombat37 Leave a comment
The first in a series of occasional posts (I hope) on unusual forms of execution.
My prime thought when reading about weird ways of despatching a fellow human being is “Why?”
.
Why not just bop them on the head and have done with it?
I suppose the answers to that mostly come down to sheer cruelty, but that’s probably a subject best given its own post in the future.
So… elephants.
It was that drawing over on the left there that led me to the knowledge that this form of execution even existed.
That is “An Execution by an Eliphant” from “An Historical Relation Of the Island Ceylon” by Robert Knox (London, 1681) – a condemned prisoner is being dismembered by an elephant in Ceylon.
The mahout is obviously having fun, but the prisoner at the back looks understandably worried.
Execution by elephant was once common in Asia, particularly in India.
Asian Elephants were used to crush, dismember, or torture captives in public executions.
The animals were trained specifically for these tasks, being able to either immediately stomp the life out of a victim or to torture them slowly over a prolonged period.
The use of the elephant apparently signified a ruler’s absolute power given his ability to ‘control wild animals’.
The intelligence, and versatility of elephants made then a finer instrument of death than other wild animals such as lions and bears.
The elephants were under the constant control of a mahout, giving a despot the ability to demonstrate mercy by granting a last-minute reprieve.
Several instances are recorded.
The kings of Siam trained their elephants to roll the convicted person "about the ground rather slowly so that he is not badly hurt".
The Mughal Emperor Akbar the Great is said to have "used this technique to chastise ‘rebels’ and then in the end the prisoners, presumably much chastened, were given their lives".
On one occasion, Akbar was recorded to have had a man thrown to the elephants to suffer five days of such treatment before pardoning him.
I wonder if the lovely Indian Restaurant in Bradford is named after him?
When the Sassanid king Khosrau II (a greedy old bugger who had a harem of 3,000 wives and 12,000 female slaves – I mean honestly, what’s the point?)
demanded as a wife one Hadiqah, the daughter of the Christian Arab Na’aman, Na’aman refused to permit his Christian daughter to be haremedn (yes, I know it’s not really a word) by a Zoroastrian; for this refusal, he was trampled to death by an elephant.
Way to win over your new bride, eh?
Rabbi Petachiah of Ratisbon, a twelfth-century Jewish traveller, reported an execution during his stay in Mesopotamia:
“At Nineveh there was an elephant.
Its head is not protruding.
It is big, eats about two wagon loads of straw at once; its mouth is in its breast, and when it wants to eat it protrudes its lip about two cubits, takes up the straw with it, and puts it in its mouth.
When the sultan condemns anyone to death, they say to the elephant, "this person is guilty."
It then seizes him with its lip, casts him aloft and slays him”
Hardly David Attenborough, but you get the drift.
The English sailor Robert Knox, writing in 1681, described a method of execution by elephant which he had seen while being held captive in Sri Lanka.
Knox says the elephants he witnessed had their tusks fitted with "sharp Iron with a socket with three edges".
After impaling the victim’s body with its tusks, the elephant:
"then tear it in pieces, and throw it limb from limb".
(see pic above)
The 19th century traveller James Emerson Tennent reports:
"a Kandyan chief, who was witness to such scenes, has assured us that the elephant never once applied his tusks, but, placing his foot on the prostrate victim, plucked off his limbs in succession by a sudden movement of his trunk"
Writing in 1850, the British diplomat Sir Henry Charles Sirr described a visit to one of the elephants that had been used by Sri Vikrama Rajasinha, the last king of Kandy, to execute criminals.
Crushing by elephant had been abolished by the British after they overthrew the Kandyan kingdom in 1815 but the king’s execution elephant was still alive and evidently remembered its former duties.
Sirr comments:
“During the native dynasty it was the practice to train elephants to put criminals to death by trampling upon them, the creatures being taught to prolong the agony of the wretched sufferers by crushing the limbs, avoiding the vital parts.
With the last tyrant king of Candy, this was a favourite mode of execution and as one of the elephant executioners was at the former capital during our sojourn there we were particularly anxious to test the creature’s sagacity and memory.
The animal was mottled and of enormous size, and was quietly standing there with his keeper seated upon his neck; the noble who accompanied us desired the man to dismount and stand on one side.
The chief then gave the word of command, ordering the creature to ‘slay the wretch!’
The elephant raised his trunk, and twined it, as if around a human being; the creature then made motions as if he were depositing the man on the earth before him, then slowly raised his back-foot, placing it alternately upon the spots where the limbs of the sufferer would have been.
This he continued to do for some minutes; then, as if satisfied that the bones must be crushed, the elephant raised his trunk high upon his head and stood motionless; the chief then ordered him to ‘complete his work,’ and the creature immediately placed one foot, as if upon the man’s abdomen, and the other upon his head, apparently using his entire strength to crush and terminate the wretch’s misery”
Such executions were often held in public.
Many of the elephants were especially large, often weighing in excess of nine tons, the more intimidating to appear to impressionable subjects.
The executions were intended to be gruesome and, by all accounts, they often were.
They were sometimes preceded by torture publicly inflicted by the same elephant.
An account of one such torture-and-execution at Baroda in 1814 has been preserved in The Percy Anecdotes:
“The man was a slave, and two days before had murdered his master, brother to a native chieftain, called Ameer Sahib.
About eleven o’clock the elephant was brought out, with only the driver on his back, surrounded by natives with bamboos in their hands.
The criminal was placed three yards behind on the ground, his legs tied by three ropes, which were fastened to a ring on the right hind leg of the animal.
At every step the elephant took, it jerked him forward, and every eight or ten steps must have dislocated another limb, for they were loose and broken when the elephant had proceeded five hundred yards.
The man, though covered in mud, showed every sign of life, and seemed to be in the most excruciating torments.
After having been tortured in this manner for about an hour, he was taken to the outside of the town, when the elephant, which is instructed for such purposes, was backed, and put his foot on the head of the criminal”
The use of elephants as executioners continued well into the latter half of the 19th century.
During an expedition to central India in 1868, Louis Rousselet described the execution of a criminal by an elephant.
A sketch was made of the execution showing the condemned being forced to place his head upon a pedestal, and then being held there while an elephant crushed his head underfoot.
The sketch was made into a woodcut and printed in "Le Tour du Monde", a widely circulated French journal of travel and adventure, as well as foreign journals such as Harper’s Weekly (see right).
The practice was eventually suppressed by the European empires that colonised the region in the 18th and 19th centuries.
The growing power of the British Empire led to the decline and eventual end of elephant executions in India.
Writing in 1914, Eleanor Maddock noted that in Kashmir, since the arrival of Europeans, "many of the old customs are disappearing – and one of these is the dreadful custom of the execution of criminals by an elephant trained for the purpose and which was known by the hereditary name of ‘Gunga Rao’."
Share this:
Twitter
Facebook
Google
Like this:
Like Loading...
Related
Post navigation
Previous PostLoving Memory Next PostDeath Café
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
Contemplating Oblivion
Search
Search for:
Andy Williams Animals Art Ashes Axe murderer Burial Café Cemeteries Churchyard Clock Coffin Cam Coffins Creative Coffins Dad Death as a reminder Elephant Executions Funeral Graves Leslie Sarony limerick Memento Mori Memorials Musicians Photographs RIP Song Teacup Top Ten Somgs Uncategorized
Archives
June 2013
May 2013
February 2013
September 2012
August 2012
June 2012
April 2012
November 2011
March 2011
February 2010
December 2009
October 2009
The Twenty Fourteen Theme .
Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com.
Follow
Follow “Asphodel Meadows”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Build a website with WordPress.com
%d bloggers like this: