by Nemorino Updated Apr 20, 2013
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: --
On December 24, 1964, we did a very unusual thing and traveled by car from Tân Ba to Saigon, a distance of about thirty kilometers.
The driver of the car was an American civilian who sometimes lived with us in the house at Tân Ba. He was an employee of USOM, the United States Operations Mission, which as far as I know was some sort of aid and development organization.
He drove like a madman because like the rest of us he was terrified about driving those thirty kilometers on an unsecured Vietnamese road. In retrospect I think it was probably one of the safest roads in the country, but that was not our opinion at the time.
We stayed at the Tân Lôc Hotel, which I later described as "the second sorriest hotel in Saigon," though I don't remember exactly what was wrong with it. In any case it was so shoddy and run-down that I was confident it would never be a target for any kind of terrorist attack.
After checking in at the Tân Lôc I went over to the PX (the Post Exchange, in the city center), where I did some shopping and had a chat with an American major whom I had briefly worked for in Hon Quan a few months earlier. This major evidently stayed around in front of the PX a few minutes longer than I did, because he was slightly injured by flying glass when the Brinks Hotel blew up.
The Brinks Hotel was being used as an American officers' billet. At 5:55 p.m. on December 24, 1964, a truckload of explosives blew up in the garage area underneath the hotel. Two Americans were killed and at least fifty Americans were injured, including the major I had just been talking to. Also a number of Vietnamese and Australians were injured, and some small buildings at the rear of the Brinks Hotel were completely destroyed by the force of the blast.
Note from 48 years later: The site of the former Brinks Hotel is now the location of the five-star Park Hyatt Saigon Hotel, which is reputed to be the best and most expensive hotel in Ho Chi Minh City. On the front lawn of the Park Hyatt there is now a plaque commemorating the car bombing of Christmas Eve 1964 at what was then the Brinks Hotel.
www.vietnamwar.net/BrinksHotel
Favorite thing: --
In a letter dated December 25, 1964, I wrote:
I just took a walk past the Brinks Hotel. It is still standing, the frame that is, but it looks like almost the whole inside of the building was blown out. All the windows are gone, and even rooms at the far corners of the top floors have holes in the walls. Most of the windows were also blown out of the Ambassador Hotel, across the street.
When the bomb exploded, last night about six, I was sitting in the USO, two blocks away, reading the latest two-month-old New Yorker. The blast shook the entire USO, just like the artillery fire that shakes our house in Tan Ba almost every night. Everyone in the USO, with the exception of me and half a dozen others, jumped up and started running in and out and around in circles. It's easy to tell who is from Saigon and who is from the field -- just watch what they do when something explodes.
I spent the evening in a small French movie theatre, on the theory that if there was going to be a Christmas Eve terror campaign against the Americans, that's the last place anyone would think to look.
In that letter I don't think I was trying to make myself sound like some sort of fearless war hero, since in fact I am one of the least fearless people I know. But by that time I was rather accustomed to hearing and feeling large explosions, so I tended not to panic as much as some of the others.
Actually the small explosions were the ones that scared me most, the ones that sounded like gunfire. To this day I jump when I hear a firecracker or a car backfiring.
In any case, by evening all the members of our advisory team had calmed down enough to do what we had been planning all along, so we met for dinner at the International Restaurant on Le Loi Boulevard. Our medic even brought his Chinese girlfriend along (second photo).
The next day, December 26, we went out to Tan Son Nhut airport and managed to get a helicopter to take us back to Tân Ba.
Photos:
1. Outside the International Restaurant on Le Loi Boulevard
2. Tan Ba district advisory team in the International Restaurant
3. USO flyer from 1964 (USO = United Service Organizations)
4. Flyer advertising a French film at the Hong Bang Cinema
Next: Têt in Saigon