SEP
MAR
Apr
16
2013
2016
2017
10 captures
1 May 06 - 16 Mar 16
Close Help
Write a Review
Join Now
Sign In
Travel Guides
Search for a Destination
Did you mean?
Try your search again
Popular Destinations
Bangkok
Paris
Amsterdam
Singapore
Rome
New York City
Kuala Lumpur
Barcelona
London
Las Vegas
New Orleans
Goa
Mumbai
Tokyo
Ho Chi Minh City
Dubai
Venice
Dublin
Seoul
Copenhagen
See all locations
See all events
Hotels
Enter a Destination
Did you mean?
Try your search again
See all hotels
Meet Members
Members Online
Top Members
Member Meetings
Latest Activity
Forums
Travel Questions & Answers
Technical Help
Miscellaneous Forum
Travel Alerts
Travel Insurance
Flights
Travel Guides
Asia
Vietnam
Thanh Pho Ho Chi Minh
Ho Chi Minh City
Favorites
Related Ho Chi Minh City Favorites Tips
Ho Chi Minh City Overview
Things to Do
Hotels
Restaurants
Events
Travel Insurance
Nightlife
Transportation
Flights
More
Shopping
Local Customs
Warnings and Dangers
Tourist Traps
What to Pack
Off The Beaten Path
Sports & Outdoors
Favorites
Forums
Itineraries
Travelogues
Travel Alerts
saigon tourist owned hotel
by machomikemd
saigon tourist guide
by machomikemd
Local Life
by machomikemd
Previous Next
See 7,306 Photos
Most Viewed Favorites in Ho Chi Minh City
All  
Budget (23)
Historical (22)
Backpacking (18)
Food and Dining (13)
Road Trip (7)
Family (6)
Business (6)
Arts & Culture (4)
Seniors (3)
Hiking & Walking (3)
Trains (3)
Beer Tasting (3)
Wine Tasting (2)
For Women (2)
Religious Travel (2)
Motorcycle (2)
Architecture (2)
Archeology (2)
Luxury (2)
Cruise (1)
Spa and Resort (1)
Adventure (1)
Farm Stay (1)
Study Abroad (1)
more filters
Sort by:
Most recent
Most helpful
Write a Review
Fever of unknown etiology
by Nemorino Updated Apr 20, 2013
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: --
My second visit to Saigon was because of illness. Since the medics at Phước Vĩnh couldn't figure out what was wrong with me, they sent me to the U.S. Navy hospital in Saigon, where the doctors diagnosed my illness as a "fever of unknown etiology" -- meaning they didn't know, either.
This was where I learned the word etiology, meaning cause or origin.
In a letter dated September 19, 1964, I wrote:
Since Tuesday I have been moldering here in the U.S. Navy hospital in Saigon with some exotic tropical disease that seems not (at least in my case) to be any more terrifying than a 48-hour head- and stomach-ache. Whatever it was, it's no longer with me, so I should be getting out of here tomorrow.
After leaving the hospital I spent one night at the Hôtel des Nations, which I remember nothing about, and then flew back to Phước Vĩnh on September 22, 1964.
Next: The Paris of the Orient?
Related to:
Historical Travel
Was this review helpful?
Explosion on Christmas Eve
by Nemorino Updated Apr 20, 2013
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: --
On December 24, 1964, we did a very unusual thing and traveled by car from Tân Ba to Saigon, a distance of about thirty kilometers.
The driver of the car was an American civilian who sometimes lived with us in the house at Tân Ba. He was an employee of USOM, the United States Operations Mission, which as far as I know was some sort of aid and development organization.
He drove like a madman because like the rest of us he was terrified about driving those thirty kilometers on an unsecured Vietnamese road. In retrospect I think it was probably one of the safest roads in the country, but that was not our opinion at the time.
We stayed at the Tân Lôc Hotel, which I later described as "the second sorriest hotel in Saigon," though I don't remember exactly what was wrong with it. In any case it was so shoddy and run-down that I was confident it would never be a target for any kind of terrorist attack.
After checking in at the Tân Lôc I went over to the PX (the Post Exchange, in the city center), where I did some shopping and had a chat with an American major whom I had briefly worked for in Hon Quan a few months earlier. This major evidently stayed around in front of the PX a few minutes longer than I did, because he was slightly injured by flying glass when the Brinks Hotel blew up.
The Brinks Hotel was being used as an American officers' billet. At 5:55 p.m. on December 24, 1964, a truckload of explosives blew up in the garage area underneath the hotel. Two Americans were killed and at least fifty Americans were injured, including the major I had just been talking to. Also a number of Vietnamese and Australians were injured, and some small buildings at the rear of the Brinks Hotel were completely destroyed by the force of the blast.
Note from 48 years later: The site of the former Brinks Hotel is now the location of the five-star Park Hyatt Saigon Hotel, which is reputed to be the best and most expensive hotel in Ho Chi Minh City. On the front lawn of the Park Hyatt there is now a plaque commemorating the car bombing of Christmas Eve 1964 at what was then the Brinks Hotel.
www.vietnamwar.net/BrinksHotel
Next: Jitters on Christmas Day
Related to:
Historical Travel
Was this review helpful?
Jitters on Christmas Day
by Nemorino Updated Apr 20, 2013
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: --
In a letter dated December 25, 1964, I wrote:
I just took a walk past the Brinks Hotel. It is still standing, the frame that is, but it looks like almost the whole inside of the building was blown out. All the windows are gone, and even rooms at the far corners of the top floors have holes in the walls. Most of the windows were also blown out of the Ambassador Hotel, across the street.
When the bomb exploded, last night about six, I was sitting in the USO, two blocks away, reading the latest two-month-old New Yorker. The blast shook the entire USO, just like the artillery fire that shakes our house in Tan Ba almost every night. Everyone in the USO, with the exception of me and half a dozen others, jumped up and started running in and out and around in circles. It's easy to tell who is from Saigon and who is from the field -- just watch what they do when something explodes.
I spent the evening in a small French movie theatre, on the theory that if there was going to be a Christmas Eve terror campaign against the Americans, that's the last place anyone would think to look.
In that letter I don't think I was trying to make myself sound like some sort of fearless war hero, since in fact I am one of the least fearless people I know. But by that time I was rather accustomed to hearing and feeling large explosions, so I tended not to panic as much as some of the others.
Actually the small explosions were the ones that scared me most, the ones that sounded like gunfire. To this day I jump when I hear a firecracker or a car backfiring.
In any case, by evening all the members of our advisory team had calmed down enough to do what we had been planning all along, so we met for dinner at the International Restaurant on Le Loi Boulevard. Our medic even brought his Chinese girlfriend along (second photo).
The next day, December 26, we went out to Tan Son Nhut airport and managed to get a helicopter to take us back to Tân Ba.
Photos:
1. Outside the International Restaurant on Le Loi Boulevard
2. Tan Ba district advisory team in the International Restaurant
3. USO flyer from 1964 (USO = United Service Organizations)
4. Flyer advertising a French film at the Hong Bang Cinema
Next: Têt in Saigon
Related to:
Historical Travel
Was this review helpful?
Solar and lunar calendars
by Nemorino Updated Apr 20, 2013
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: --
While I was in Saigon for Têt I saved this calendar page to show how the Vietnamese keep their solar and lunar calendars straight.
The big section at the top is the solar date in French, Saturday, January 30, 1965. Below, in Vietnamese and Chinese, is the corresponding date on their lunar calendar: Saturday, December 28.
In a letter dated February 9, 1965 (by the solar calendar, of course) I wrote:
We had a good vacation in Saigon Jan. 31 - Feb 4. I stayed in the Hotel Dong Khanh in Cholon, the Chinese twin-city of Saigon. Did a lot of walking, writing, studying, also saw the movie version of Flower Drum Song again, this time in French.
For the benefit of those who are too young to remember Flower Drum Song I should explain that it was a Broadway musical by Rogers and Hammerstein set in San Francisco's Chinatown. It was later made into a film starring Nancy Kwan.
www.nancy-kwan.com/
Next: Les Halles Centrales (Ben Thanh Market)
Related to:
Historical Travel
Was this review helpful?
On my way back from Hong Kong
by Nemorino Updated Apr 20, 2013
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: --
My seventh visit to Saigon was also in March 1965, when I spent one night at the Hotel Saigon after returning from my week in Hong Kong.
In a letter dated March 14, 1965, I wrote:
Hong Kong was a welcome relief from the idiocy and injustice -- and heat -- of Vietnam. I had a very fine time; did a lot of walking around the hills of Hong Kong island. I also spent three days in Saigon, before and after Hong Kong. So it was a good, long vacation.
From another letter of March 15, 1965:
Hong Kong was a good thing: cool, peaceful, clean -- well, not really clean, but the accumulated filth doesn't fester like it does in Vietnam, nor does Hong Kong have the pervasive smell of swamp- and fart-gas that hangs over Saigon. [. . .]
Best, in fact only redeeming feature of Saigon these days is the Centre Culturel Français, the only public building in Saigon that is not surrounded by barbed wire; there, in air-conditioned comfort, one can see the only decent films in town, for free; also recitals, lectures, etc. There is also a Goethe Institute in Saigon (and in Hong Kong, for that matter) and, of course, on the busiest corner of the largest boulevard in the center of town, the USIS library with the big plate-glass show windows. Look at the workmen, replacing all those plate-glass windows. All I can say is, USIS (commonly known as "Useless") must have a hell of a lot of plate glass windows stockpiled someplace around here.
(My photo on this tip shows Le Loi Boulevard, which was called Boulevard Bonnard in French colonial times, with the flags of nations which were at least nominally supporting the South Vietnamese government in 1965.)
Next: Vietnamese movie theaters
Was this review helpful?
The Sinh Café
by Nemorino Updated Apr 19, 2013
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: --
My fourteenth visit to Saigon was in August 1995.
Nick and I took an overnight train from Hué (going through Xuan Loc, presumably, though we were asleep and didn't notice). We arrived in Saigon at 11 o'clock in the morning of Tuesday, August 8, 1995 and immediately took a taxi to the Sinh Café to book a three-day Mekong Delta tour.
We stayed the night at a hotel called the Mini-Hotel Bi Saigon, which was right around the corner from the Sinh Café.
The next morning we left on our Mekong Delta tour, which I have described in four tips on my Vietnam page.
Note from fifteen years later:
When Nick and I were in Vietnam in 1995 there was only one Sinh Café, but since then a number of fake Sinh Cafés have sprung up, using the same name but often charging higher prices.
As far as I know the real (original) Sinh Café is now called TheSinhTourist and has its headquarters at 246 De Tham Street, district 1, Ho Chi Minh City, which is also where it was in 1995. Their telephone number is (848) 38389597.
www.thesinhtourist.vn/
Photos:
1. Me at the floating hotel in Saigon (we didn't stay there, just had a look)
2. The former American embassy (photo 1995)
Next: Goodbye to Saigon, 1995
Related to:
Historical Travel
Was this review helpful?
San Miguel Beer
by machomikemd Updated Jul 3, 2012
Favorite thing: Although the Number One Beer in Vietnam is still Saigon Beer and the second most popular beer is Tiger Beer, San Miguel Beer is growing in Popularity in Vietnam and is battling south east asia's regional beer superpower Tiger Beer in Vietnam (and in other parts of south east asia too like in cambodia, thailand, laos, burma). San Miguel beer is currently the third most popular beer for locals ad they have extensive promotions here. You can buy San Miguel beer products like Pale Pilsen and San Miguel Beer Lite at the supermarket and bars and convenience stores around saigon. a bottle of san miguel beer costs 13,000 VND at the supermarket and convenience stores and goes up to 80,000 VND at the Bars.
Fondest memory: San Miguel beer is available in Saigon
Related to:
Food and Dining
Budget Travel
Beer Tasting
Was this review helpful?
Tiger Beer! Popular Here in Sai Gon!
by machomikemd Updated Jun 13, 2012
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: Tiger Beer, the another South East Asian Beer and Originated in Singapore (and a Direct Competitor of San Miguel Beer for regional beer supremacy) is presently, the number one Beer here in Saigon. Saigon Beer Comes in a Close Second and San Miguel Beer a nother close third since it is very aggressive at marketing it's brand. A 330 ml Can of Tiger Beer cost 25,000 VND a bottle here at the convenience stores and supermarkets and is available everywhere. It will cost 60,000 to 120,000 VND to buy it from high end bars and lounges like the rex hotel and Apocalypse Now.
Fondest memory: you can buy tiger beer almost everywhere in saigon since it is presently the number one beer in saigon in terms of sales.
Related to:
Luxury Travel
Beer Tasting
Food and Dining
Was this review helpful?
Visa for Vietnam
by jlanza29 Updated May 7, 2011
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: The process for getting a visa for Vietnam is fast and easy ... go to the Embassy website and download the visa application and fill it out, take 2 photos and send it in to the Embassy in DC and a week later you'll have your visa and you'll be on your way. When we arrived in HCMC we noticed a big queue for visa's on arrival with a authorization letter, if you go that route you'll spent more than an hour waiting to get your visa instead having it and being done and get on going. The cost of the visa was $70 plus return FEDEX fees.
Was this review helpful?
Saigon / Ho Chi Minh City
by Gili_S Written Jan 7, 2011
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: Ho Chi Minh City is the official and the modern name of Saigon. It is the largest city in Vietnam and the business center. This city is rich in culture, architecture, parks, restaurants and almost everything you can find here.
Fondest memory: Saigon / Ho Chi Minh City
Was this review helpful?
rental Vehicles and private tourguide
by no_second_chance Written Feb 25, 2010
Favorite thing: it is expensive for easy tours like Cuchi tunnel, mekong delta and City tour. BuT, it may be what you have to pay for PRIVATE tour. So you should consider whether it is worth. I myself don't think it's worth.
For your 2nd option, renting a van may be a good idea if you all can afford. there are lots of places in HCMC that allow you to rent a van with a driver. You should take a look at this site http://www.vietnamtravelkey.com/transfer/vietnam_car_rental.htm
For tour guide, there is a web http://www.hanoitoursvietnam.com/Vietnam-Travel-Services/Tour-Guide-Service/Hire-A-Guide/
OR http://www.toursbylocals.com/guide686
it probably gives you an idea how much you will have to spend if you prefer the rental van and guide for hire option, although you can get to see all of those destinations you mentioned at a much cheaper price by using a non-private tour by any travel agent ;).
Related to:
Luxury Travel
Was this review helpful?
by another name.....
by davecallahan Written Oct 4, 2008
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: Ho Chi Minh City has had several names in its interesting history.
At one time it was Prey Nokor ("forest empire/city" in the Khmer language) with reference to its jungle surroundings.
Some experts think that there was a predecessor to this name and it was Prey Kor.
Refugees from the north settled here and named it Sai Gon (Vietnames for dense forestland).
The French colonized it and called it Gia Dinh (but later reverted to the people's usage of Saigon).
After the Vietnamese won the war against the Americans, the name was changed to Ho Chi Minh City in honor of that famous North Vietnam leader.
Related to:
Historical Travel
Was this review helpful?
win some or lose some??
by travel_holic Written Sep 12, 2008
Favorite thing: $140 that's probably price for a private trip for 2 of you. Someone mention $90 for private car, so $140 for full package is reasonable.
If you can afford this, you'll have guide for yourself, that's much better
Fondest memory: Sheridan Irish Bar
Was this review helpful?
Money
by JonnyVN Written Jan 5, 2008
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: Seen a number of tips advising to use US$ and bring lots of small denominations. Really don't advise this for two reasons: You'll get a better price in VND, most times you'll be rounded up. Smaller notes are worth much less than 100 bills so could be a double wammy.
Bring new notes (nearly all currencies are accepted here) and make sure you bring large denominations and exchange as you go. There are a large number of ATMs all over Vietnam and credit/debit cards are accepted all over the place.
JonnyVN
Was this review helpful?
ARCHIVED! Airport Tax collected separately
by xuessium Updated Oct 28, 2007
Helpfulness
Favorite thing: ARCHIVED! THIS TIP IS NO LONGER VALID!! AIRPORT TAX IS NOW INCLUDED INTO THE TICKET.
The airport tax is collected at the airport itself upon your departure from HCMC. There will be a counter right after you had cleared security and had gotten your passport stamped for departure to collect the US$12 airport tax.
Related to:
Backpacking
Budget Travel
Business Travel
Was this review helpful?
1 - 15 of 34
1
2
3
Next
Ho Chi Minh City Hotels
See all 1345 Hotels in Ho Chi Minh City
Park Hyatt Saigon
All rooms offer pool of City views with full luxury amenities. As true sense 5- Star hotel, it is...
more
Show Prices
4 Reviews  
Caravelle Hotel
The Caravelle was opened to the public on Christmas Eve 1959 originally as a ten storey hotel. ...
more
Show Prices
8 Reviews  
Lotte Legend Hotel Saigon
Strengths: Best food (international buffet at Atrium Café, Chinese food at Crystal Jade). Best view...
more
Show Prices
2 Reviews  
Latest Ho Chi Minh City Hotel Reviews
Dragon Palace Hotel
Excellent (4.5 out of 5.0) 2 Reviews
Sheraton Saigon Hotel & Towers
Very Good (3.5 out of 5.0) 7 Reviews
New World Hotel Saigon
Excellent (4.5 out of 5.0) 12 Reviews
Grand Hotel Saigon
Great (4.0 out of 5.0) 7 Reviews
Hong Han Hotel
Good (3.0 out of 5.0) 1 Review
Hotel Equatorial Ho Chi Minh City
Great (4.0 out of 5.0) 6 Reviews
Continental Hotel
Great (4.0 out of 5.0) 4 Reviews
Hotel Majestic
Excellent (4.5 out of 5.0) 8 Reviews
Hotel 211
Great (4.0 out of 5.0) 2 Reviews
Bich Duyen Hotel
Best (5.0 out of 5.0) 9 Reviews
Instant Answers: Ho Chi Minh City
Get an instant answer from local experts and frequent travelers
25 travelers online now
Comments
unfollow
follow
1 - 0 of 0
Great room rates
Rex Hotel Ho Chi Minh City
Booking.com  
Great room rates
Hotel Continental Saigon Ho Chi Minh City
Expedia.com Amazing offers on more than 120,000 hotels all over the world.
Sponsored Links
 
Explore the World
Travel Destinations
Bahia Honda Key Hotels
Cairns Hotels
Gulmarg Hotels
Nuwara Eliya Hotels
Amsterdam
Gettysburg
Sudbury Hotels
Port Dickson
Moab Hotels
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
India
Seaside Heights Hotels
Muzaffarabad
Xi'an Hotels
Sequoia National Park
Travel Highlights
Cities Not to Miss Near Florence
Lourdes Favorites
Dubai Favorites
Punta Cana Favorites
Subic Favorites
Ho Chi Minh City Favorites
more
Travel tips and advice posted by real travelers and Ho Chi Minh City locals.
Experience Ho Chi Minh City
3,165 Tips
7,306 Photos
56 Videos
343 members live here
5,543 Travel Answers
Click here for best deals for Ho Chi Minh City
Great room rates
Caravelle Saigon Ho Chi Minh City
Expedia.com Amazing offers on more than 120,000 hotels all over the world.
Great room rates
Hotel Majestic Saigon Ho Chi Minh City
Expedia.com Amazing offers on more than 120,000 hotels all over the world.
Great room rates
Park Hyatt Saigon Ho Chi Minh City
Hotels.com  
Great room rates
Grand Hotel Saigon Ho Chi Minh City
Agoda.com  
Sponsored Links
Other Favorites in Ho Chi Minh City
Useful tips
Street life
Local Life
Transportation
Sights
Architecture
All Favorites in Ho Chi Minh City
Top Ho Chi Minh City Writers
Saigon Saigon !
 Written before the trip @ Changi Airport : I'm filled with anticipation as I'm writing this. I'm finally going to HoChiMinCity! Since I only have a few days here, I intend to have a blast of a time...... 
Home
 Things have changed dramatically since I first started coming here over 12 years ago, it's modernising, you can buy just about anything (well sort of, you can get marmite at least now) and the economy... 
IMPREXXION: HO CHI MINH CITY
 ..."The David that made the mighty Goliath fell flat on its face into a couldron full of ash. Come and see the place that the US thought it would impulverise with imperial might by bombing it... 
Former Saigon
 Saigon was kind of a magical name to me. After seeing so many movies and books about old Saigon, Saigon at the colonialist period, french Saigon... I admit I had an idealised concept of the city. I...... 
Ho Chi Minh  City 29/3/08  - 3/4/08
 HO CHI MINH CITY  The Spring Hotel was to be my base for a few days, a really nice Hotel where I had a very enjoyable stay. From here, I was close to the Opera house, railway station, Notre Dame... 
View all rated pages
View newest pages
Build your own Ho Chi Minh City page
Build your own Ho Chi Minh City Itinerary
Sponsored Listings
Ho Chi Minh City Members Meetings
Mrz 18, 2016 
Gwened in Saigon
see all Ho Chi Minh City member meetings
About VirtualTourist |         Contact Us |         Press Center | Help | Travel Tools | User Agreement | Privacy Statement
VirtualTourist®© 1994-2016 VirtualTourist.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Back to Top
All reports are strictly confidential. Please explain why you are reporting this: