JAN
MAR
APR
16
2015
2016
2017
6 captures
29 Apr 15 - 23 Apr 16
Close Help
for Teachers   for Schools   for Companies
Log In
Menu
Plans
Courses Courses
Find Courses by Subject
Find Courses by Subject
Science
Math
Business
Psychology
History
English
Social Science
Humanities
Spanish
ACT & SAT Test Prep
Teacher Certification
Professional Development
By Education Level
By Education Level
College
High School
Middle School
Browse All Courses
Explore Over
1000+
video courses
Browse All Courses
Credit Credit
Credit Options
Online College Credit
High School & GED
Certificates of Completion
How it Works
Earn Transferable Credit & Get your Degree fast
Learn More
Degrees Degrees
Find Degrees by Subject
Find Degrees by Subject
Agriculture
Architecture
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
Business
Communications and Journalism
Computer Sciences
Culinary Arts and Personal Services
Education
Engineering
Legal
Liberal Arts and Humanities
Mechanic and Repair Technologies
Medical and Health Professions
Physical Sciences
Psychology
Transportation and Distribution
Visual and Performing Arts
Find Degrees by Level
By Level
High School Diploma
Associates Degrees
Bachelor Degrees
Master Degrees
Online Degrees
Search All Degrees
Find a Degree that fits your Goals
Search Degrees
Schools Schools
Browse Schools by Degree Level
Browse Schools by Degree Level
Graduate Degrees
High School Diplomas
Certificate Programs
Post Degree Certificates
Undergraduate Degrees
Browse Schools
Browse Schools
Public Schools by State
University Video Reviews
Career Counseling & Job Center
Career Counseling & Job Center
Job Interviewing Tip Videos
Job Networking Videos
Résumé How To Videos
Job Search Tips
Career Videos
Career Research
Career Research
Researching Careers Videos
Glossary of Careers
Career Info by Degree
Job Outlook by Region
Degree & Career Research Articles
Create Account
Contact Support
Login
Sign Up
for Teachers   for Schools   for Companies
Video: Johnson Americanizes the War in Vietnam
The path toward the full Americanization of the Vietnam War was a gradual process.
Learn about President Lyndon B. Johnson's initial strategy, his response to North Vietnam and his decision for escalation in this video lesson.
History 108: History of the Vietnam War  /  History Courses
Course Navigator
Johnson's Military Strategies for American SuccessNext Lesson
Johnson Americanizes the War in Vietnam
Chapter 4 /  Lesson 4   Transcript
Video
Quiz & Worksheet - How President Johnson Americanized the Vietnam War Quiz
Course
Watch short & fun videos Start Your Free Trial Today
An error occurred trying to load this video.
Try refreshing the page, or contact customer support.
You must create an account to continue watching
Register for a free trial
Are you a student or a teacher?
I am a student
I am a teacher
What is your educational goal?
Back
Start Your Free Trial To Continue Watching
As a member, you'll also get unlimited access to over
lessons in math, English, science, history, and more.
Plus, get practice tests, quizzes, and personalized coaching to help you succeed.
Free 5-day trial
It only takes a few minutes to set up and you can cancel at any time.
Already registered?
Login here for                     access
Back
You're on a roll.
Keep up the good work!
Take Quiz Watch Next Lesson
Replay
Just checking in.
Are you still watching?
Yes!
Keep playing.
Your next lesson will play in 10 seconds
Coming up next: Johnson's Military Strategies for American Success
0:01 The Road to Americanization
1:03 Limiting American Operations
4:26 Escalating the War in Vietnam
7:34 Lesson Summary
Timeline
Autoplay
Autoplay
1,545
views
Create an account to start this course today
Try it free for 5 days!
Create An Account
Recommended Lessons and Courses for You
Related Lessons
Related Courses
The Vietnam War: Causes, Conflicts & Effects
United States Involvement in the Korean War: Causes and Effects
Hippies and the Counterculture: Origins, Beliefs and Legacy
American Economy in the 1920s: Consumerism, Stock Market & Economic Shift
The War Powers Act of 1973: Definition & Summary
Franklin D. Roosevelt's Foreign Policy Prior to World War II
Economic, Social & Political Consequences of the Great War
The Civil Rights Movement During the 1960s
How to Determine Maximum and Minimum Values of a Graph
The Women's Movement: Causes, Campaigns & Impacts on the US
Eisenhower's Foreign Policy in Southeast Asia in the 1950s
Civil War Begins: Northern and Southern Advantages Compared
American Imperialism: Definition, Reasons & Rising International Power
What Is Subculture?
- Theories, Definition & Examples
McCarthyism and the Red Scare: Definition, Causes & Effects
Abiotic Factors of an Ecosystem: Definition & Examples
Enlarging American Involvement in Vietnam Under Kennedy
Post-War American Life: Culture of the late 1940s & 1950s
Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh
Vietnam Turning Points: The Buddhist Crisis, Kennedy Assassination & More
History 104: US History II
Political Science 102: American Government
CLEP Social Sciences and History: Study Guide & Test Prep
McDougal Littell Modern World History - Patterns of Interaction: Online Textbook Help
Ancient Greece Study Guide
CLEP Western Civilization II: Study Guide & Test Prep
Western Civilization 1648 to the Present: Help and Review
The Vietnam War: Help and Review
UExcel World Conflicts Since 1900: Study Guide & Test Prep
Ancient Rome Study Guide
American Revolution Study Guide
US History 1 Study Guide
US History 2 Study Guide
DSST A History of the Vietnam War: Study Guide & Test Prep
World Conflicts Since 1900: Certificate Program
History of the Vietnam War: Certificate Program
DSST Western Europe Since 1945: Study Guide & Test Prep
Western Civilization From 1648 to Today: Certificate Program
Western Europe Since 1945: Certificate Program
The Vietnam War: Help and Review
Lesson Transcript
Instructor: Adam Richards
Adam has a master's degree in history.
The path toward the full Americanization of the Vietnam War was a gradual process.
Learn about President Lyndon B. Johnson's initial strategy, his response to North Vietnam and his decision for escalation in this video lesson.
The Road to Americanization
The decision to introduce American combat troops to the Vietnam War in March of 1965 was the result of several months of gradual escalation by President Lyndon B. Johnson.
When Johnson assumed office in November 1963, he made the war in Vietnam a priority.
Johnson refused to be the first president to lose a foreign entanglement; he was not fond of fighting in Vietnam, but he would not succumb to communist North Vietnam.
However, even though Vietnam was a concern, Johnson's domestic agenda, consisting of civil rights legislation and the Great Society program, as well as the looming presidential election in 1964, took precedence.
In order to balance the war and his domestic goals, Johnson adopted the policy his predecessors employed of doing just enough in Vietnam to prevent a communist takeover.
While maintaining the status quo worked during 1964, Johnson had to gradually escalate.
This resulted in the introduction of combat troops in 1965 and the United States replacing the South Vietnamese as the main fighting force in the Vietnam War.
Limiting American Operations
Johnson's goal of 1964 was to provide just enough American support to bolster South Vietnam.
He refused to introduce combat troops into the region because he believed that the South Vietnamese were responsible for conducting the war.
Instead, he provided unlimited American advice and assistance to help the South Vietnamese achieve those means.
This notion was solidified in March of that year when Johnson approved National Security Action Memorandum (or NSAM) 288, which identified maintaining South Vietnam as a vital goal.
As a result, the American advisory effort grew from 16,000 to over 23,000 men to help train and equip the South Vietnamese.
In April, Johnson launched the 'Show the Flag' program, which encouraged international communities to support South Vietnam by coming to the nation's aid.
This was Johnson's attempt at building a coalition effort in the Vietnam War, one that was largely unsuccessful.
By summer of 1964, National Liberation Front, or NLF, insurgents and soldiers from the People's Army of Vietnam, or PAVN, had continued to infiltrate into and engage South Vietnam.
Johnson continued to refuse to send American combat troops, settling on increasing covert operations against North Vietnam.
He launched a sizable propaganda campaign against the communists while expanding OPLAN-34A, which encouraged raids against North Vietnamese coastal installations that were led by the South Vietnamese but supported by American naval carriers.
This ultimately resulted in the North Vietnamese retaliating against American naval carriers in what became known as the Gulf of Tonkin Crisis between August 2 and 4.
The incident in the Gulf of Tonkin could not have come at a worse time for Johnson.
In July, Barry Goldwater, the Republican candidate for president, lambasted Johnson for not doing enough to defeat the Vietnamese communists.
Johnson was forced to respond to the crisis, but without escalating the war and costing himself the election in November.
On August 5, Johnson launched Operation Pierce Arrow, which was a limited American airstrike against select North Vietnamese war-making facilities.
Johnson was then given a blank check to conduct operations in South Vietnam with the passage of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution on August 7, but he remained adamant that he would not send American troops to fight in place of the South Vietnamese.
While Johnson continued to pursue a limited American effort in Southeast Asia, North Vietnam flooded South Vietnam with troops and insurgents; it also began operations aimed at the United States.
On November 1, two nights before the presidential election, members of the NLF mortared the American airbase at Bien Hoa, causing significant damage and injuries.
Johnson refused to retaliate on the eve of the election, but he did authorize studies into how the United States could respond to North Vietnam.
Even after Johnson resoundingly defeated Goldwater, he continued to pursue a limited approach throughout the rest of 1964.
However, in December, North Vietnam forced Johnson's hand.
On December 24, the NLF bombed the Brinks Hotel in Saigon, which housed American advisors; two were killed.
Johnson once again rejected retaliation.
Then, on December 28, the South Vietnamese military was resoundingly defeated at the Battle of Binh Gia.
Johnson's advisors pushed for a gradual escalation to bolster the deteriorating South Vietnam.
The president complied.
Escalating the War in Vietnam
The year 1965 symbolized Johnson's decision to Americanize the Vietnam War.
Johnson had a significant amount of support from Congress as well as the American public to do what was necessary in Vietnam.
Many of Johnson's advisors even encouraged a full engagement of North Vietnam.
The opportunity presented itself on February 7 when the NLF shelled Camp Holloway, an American base in the Central Highlands; eight Americans died.
Johnson responded with another tactical reprisal airstrike known as Operation Flaming Dart.
The NLF then attacked another American installation in Qui Nhon on February 10, resulting in 23 American fatalities.
Johnson launched Operation Flaming Dart II.
Simultaneously, he asked for the results from the study conducted prior to the election.
His advisors recommended the gradual bombing of North Vietnam.
Johnson complied and on March 2 approved of the beginning of Operation Rolling Thunder, a massive air war over North Vietnam.
Operation Rolling Thunder was threefold: it represented the 'carrot-and-the-stick' strategy of dangling a peace treaty favorable to the United States in front of the North Vietnamese while continually bombing the region until the agreement was accepted; it was meant to deter the North from supplying the NLF; and it also signified the United States' determination to protect South Vietnam.
The United States now controlled and dictated the advisory effort and the air war.
×
Unlock Content
Over 10,000 lessons in all major subjects
Get FREE access for 5 days,
just create an account.
Start a FREE trial
No obligation, cancel anytime.
Want to learn more?
Select a subject to preview related courses:
Math
History
English
ACT/SAT
Science
Business
Psychology
AP
The full Americanization of the Vietnam War came on March 8 when the first American combat troops, the Battalion Landing Team 3rd Battalion, 9th Marine Regiment, touched down on the beaches of Da Nang in South Vietnam.
The goal of the Marines was to protect American airbases from North Vietnamese retaliation as a result of the beginning of Operation Rolling Thunder.
Their mission was soon altered by Johnson to support the enclave strategy, which witnessed the Marines safeguarding strategic cities, installations and air strips from the NLF and PAVN along South Vietnam's coast.
This also freed many South Vietnamese battalions to fight the war within the interior region.
Simultaneously, Johnson expanded naval operations when he approved of Operation Market Time to combat North Vietnamese sea movement.
Even with the new American combat presence, the South Vietnamese struggled mightily to defeat NLF and PAVN forces.
By July, General William Westmoreland, who replaced General Paul Harkins as commander of the Military Assistance Command Vietnam (MACV), requested 35 battalions of combat troops in order to move from the defensive enclave strategy to an aggressive search-and-destroy campaign to take the war to the enemy.
Between July 21 and 28, Johnson organized meetings to mull granting Westmoreland's request and escalating in Vietnam.
On July 28, Johnson approved sending 44 battalions to war; this translated into 125,000 American combat troops in Vietnam, many of whom were draftees.
The 'July Decision' represented a point of no return for the United States.
Americans replaced the South Vietnamese as the main fighting force, and the United States was locked into a protracted war against a determined enemy.
It also posed the question of how Johnson would fund both his Great Society and the Vietnam War?
Lesson Summary
President Lyndon B. Johnson wanted to maintain a limited approach to the Vietnam War.
His domestic agenda, consisting of civil rights legislation and the Great Society program, was much more important.
Throughout 1964 Johnson refrained from escalating in Vietnam.
When situations arose, such as the Gulf of Tonkin Crisis, he responded with limited retaliatory strikes, such as Operation Pierce Arrow.
However, when the National Liberation Front (NLF) began targeting American advisors and installations, Johnson was forced to react.
Reprisal strikes were not deterring the North Vietnamese.
Johnson then settled on Operation Rolling Thunder to demonstrate the American determination in supporting South Vietnam and to force the North Vietnamese to accept a settlement.
Johnson also needed to protect American airbases, so he introduced the first American combat troops into Vietnam on March 8, 1965.
With the South Vietnamese unable to defeat the National Liberation Front and the People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN), Johnson approved of sending 44 combat battalions to Vietnam on July 28, 1965.
The 'July Decision' deepened the United States' commitment to the Vietnam War.
To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
Create your account
Register for a free trial
Are you a student or a teacher?
I am a student
I am a teacher
What is your educational goal?
Back
Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 10 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member?
Log In
Back
Description
Summary:
Visit the History 108: History of the Vietnam War page to learn more.
Earning Credit
Earning College Credit
Did you know… We have over 49 college                     courses that prepare you to earn                     credit by exam that is accepted by over 2,000 colleges and universities.
You can test out of the                     first two years of college and save thousands off your degree.
Anyone can earn                     credit-by-exam regardless of age or education level.
To learn more, visit our Earning Credit Page
Transferring credit to the school of your choice
Not sure what college you want to attend yet?
Study.com has thousands of articles about every                         imaginable degree, area of                         study                         and career path that can help you find the school that's right for you.
Research Schools, Degrees & Careers
Get the unbiased info you need to find the right school.
Browse Articles By Category
Browse an area of study or degree level.
Area of Study
Agriculture
Architecture
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
Business
Communications and Journalism
Computer Sciences
Culinary Arts and Personal Services
Education
Engineering
Legal
Liberal Arts and Humanities
Mechanic and Repair Technologies
Medical and Health Professions
Physical Sciences
Psychology
Transportation and Distribution
Visual and Performing Arts
Degree Level
High School Diploma
Associates Degrees
Bachelor Degrees
Master Degrees
Online Degrees
Recommended Articles
Related
Recently Updated
Popular
Strategy and Economics Certificate: Program Overview
Business Strategy Course Overviews
Advanced Management Strategy Certificate: Program Summary
Masters Degree in Strategy: Program Overviews
Online Strategy Training Programs with Course Information
Life Strategy Coach: Education Requirements and Career Info
How to Become an IT Strategy Consultant
How to Become a Business Strategy Consultant: Career Roadmap
Global Business Strategy Classes and Courses
MBA in Advanced Marketing Strategy: Degree Overview
SWAT Training Program Information and Requirements
Nursing Adult Education: Overview of Nursing Career Education Programs
Should I Major in Sociology?
- Quiz & Self-Assessment Test
Pediatric Anesthesiologist Salary Career and Education Info
Job Description of a Panel Assembler
Accessibility Coordinator Job Description Duties and Outlook
Art Director Degree
Forensic Science Associates
×
Course Navigator
Back To Course
History 108: History of the Vietnam War
7 chapters | 32 lessons
1 - Roots of the Vietnam War
Go to Roots of the Vietnam War
2 - Unrest in Vietnam During the Eisenhower Years
Go to Unrest in Vietnam During the Eisenhower Years
3 - John F Kennedy and the Vietnam War
Go to John F Kennedy and the Vietnam War
4 - Lyndon B. Johnson and the Vietnam War
Gulf of Tonkin Crisis and Resolution: Events and Congressional Response 6:42
A Revolving Door of Leadership in South Vietnam 8:14
The Air War: Events and Key Operations 7:43
Johnson Americanizes the War in Vietnam 8:46
7:49
Next Lesson
Johnson's Military Strategies for American Success
Opposition to the Vietnam War, 1965-1968 7:13
People's Army of Vietnam and the National Liberation Front 6:52
Go to Lyndon B. Johnson and the Vietnam War
5 - Vietnam War During the Nixon Years
Go to Vietnam War During the Nixon Years
6 - Major Battles & Offensives of the Vietnam War
Go to Major Battles & Offensives of the Vietnam War
7 - The Vietnam War After American Involvement
Go to The Vietnam War After American Involvement
Like this lesson Share
Explore our library of over 10,000 lessons
Search
Browse
Browse by subject
College Courses
Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses
High School Courses
AP
Common Core
GED
High School
See All High School Courses
Other Courses
College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses
Click "next lesson" whenever you finish a lesson and quiz.
Got It
You now have full access to our lessons and courses.
Watch the lesson now or keep exploring.
Got It
You're 25% of the way through this course!
Keep going at this rate,and you'll be done before you know it.
1
The first step is always the hardest!
Congrats on finishing your first lesson.
Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
5
Way to go!
If you watch at least 30 minutes of lessons each day you'll master your goals before you know it.
Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
10
Congratulations on earning a badge for watching 10 videos but you've only scratched the surface.
Keep it up!
Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
20
You've just watched 20 videos and earned a badge for your accomplishment!
Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
50
You've just earned a badge for watching 50 different lessons.
Keep it up, you're making great progress!
Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
100
You just watched your 100th video lesson.
You have earned a badge for this achievement!
Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
200
Congratulations!
You just finished watching your 200th lesson and earned a badge!
Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
300
Congratulations!
You just finished watching your 300th lesson and earned a badge!
Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
500
You are a superstar!
You have earned the prestigious 500 video lessons watched badge.
Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
1K
Incredible.
You have just entered the exclusive club and earned the 1000 videos watched badge.
Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
20
You have earned a badge for watching 20 minutes of lessons.
50
You have earned a badge for watching 50 minutes of lessons.
100
You have earned a badge for watching 100 minutes of lessons.
250
You have earned a badge for watching 250 minutes of lessons.
500
You have earned a badge for watching 500 minutes of lessons.
1K
You have earned a badge for watching 1000 minutes of lessons.
Follow Us:
Home | About Us | Careers | Teach for Us | FAQ | Contact Support
Terms of Use | Privacy Policy
© copyright 2003-                           2016 Study.com.
All other trademarks and copyrights are         the property of their respective owners.
All rights reserved.