Feb
MAR
Apr
16
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
16 Mar 16 - 16 Mar 16
Close Help
OVGuide
Login Sign up
Log In
forgot your password?
Login with Facebook
Pick your country
Movies
Movies Home All Movies Amazon Prime Movies Free Full Movies Top Box Office
TV
TV Home All TV Shows Amazon Prime TV Shows Free Full TV Shows All Web Series Videos
Celebrity
Celebrity Home Videos Top Lists
Music
Music Home Videos Browse Musicians Top Lists
Anime
Anime Home Browse Anime Videos Top Lists
More
Animals Asian Car Comedy Education Food
Fitness Games Guns Lifestyle Live News
Sports Science Technology Travel Viral
Family Filter: ON OFF
News Home
Videos
Top Lists
1964 Brinks Hotel Bombing Video | Event Coverage and Interviews
The Brink Hotel in Saigon, also known as the Brink Bachelor Officers Quarters, was bombed by the Viet Cong on the evening of December 24, 1964, during the Vietnam War.
Two Viet Cong operatives detonated a car bomb underneath the hotel, which housed United States Army officers.
The explosion...   Show More
The Brink Hotel in Saigon, also known as the Brink Bachelor Officers Quarters, was bombed by the Viet Cong on the evening of December 24, 1964, during the Vietnam War.
Two Viet Cong operatives detonated a car bomb underneath the hotel, which housed United States Army officers.
The explosion killed two Americans, an officer and an NCO, and injured approximately 60, including military personnel and Vietnamese civilians.
The Vietcong commanders had planned the venture with two objectives in mind.
First, by attacking an American installation in the center of the heavily guarded capital, the Vietcong intended to demonstrate their ability to strike in South Vietnam should the United States decide to launch air raids against North Vietnam.
Second, the bombing would demonstrate to the South Vietnamese that the Americans were vulnerable and could not be relied upon for protection.
The bombing prompted debate within the administration of United States President Lyndon B. Johnson.
Show Less
Web Links
Unlimited Streaming.
Anywhere.
Anytime.
1964 Brinks Hotel bombing Videos
Loading Clips...
Comments About 1964 Brinks Hotel bombing
Follow Us https://www.facebook.com/ovguide https://plus.google.com/105594046652620637381/posts http://pinterest.com/ovguide/pins/ https://twitter.com/OVGuide
Get OVGuide App Android iPhone/iPad Roku Channel
Mobile Version
About OVGuide
Blog
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
DMCA
© Copyright 2006-2016 Online Video Guide.
OVGuide.
OV Guide.
All Rights Reserved.