OCT
MAR
Apr
16
2013
2016
2017
49 captures
26 Dec 11 - 16 Mar 16
Close Help
The Atlantic
Subscribe
Search
Menu
The Annals of Christmas Diplomacy
Close
Home
Latest
Most Popular
Magazine
Video
Photo
Writers
News
Politics
Business
Culture
Science
Technology
Health
Sexes
U.S. Society
Education
Global
Notes
Projects
Next America
Events
Books
Shop
Your Account Sign Out
Sign In Sign Up
2 Free Issues
Try two trial issues of The Atlantic with our compliments.
Claim now
Follow
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Tumblr
Pinterest
RSS
App Store
See our Newsletters >
previousEndometrial: The Most Common Reproductive Cancer in Women nextBeef: It's Not What's for Dinner
The Annals of Christmas Diplomacy
We noticed that you have an
AD BLOCKER
ENABLED
Please consider disabling it      for our site, or supporting our      work in one of these ways
Subscribe Now >
Sign up for
The Atlantic Daily newsletter
I want to receive updates from partners and sponsors.
Text Size
Heather Horn
Dec 24, 2011
Global
How the winter holiday has guided international events, for better and for worse
World War I soldiers stop fighting to play football on Christmas Day in Salonika, 1915 / Wikimedia
Before Kim Jong-il's death, the last big story out of North Korea had to do with Christmas lights.
"North Korea has warned South Korea of 'unexpected consequences' if it lights up a Christmas tree-shaped tower near their tense border," the BBC reported .
At issue, apparently, was "psychological warfare" -- standard North Korean lingo for anything deemed insolent or provocative.
The annual Korean Christmas light drama, several years old now, may be one of the weirder stories of Christmas diplomacy, but it's hardly the only one.
History has seen, in fact, many international events in which this winter holiday, whether in timing or tradition, has played a role.
Here are just a few instances in which Christmas has figured into international relations, whether as an excuse, a peg for action, or a moment for reflection.
The stories are alternately troubling and heart-warming: just as the holiday has occasioned some of the more touching displays of camaraderie -- including amid devastating warfare -- it has also served to maximize casualties in carefully planned attacks.
As always, events are what we make of them.
The Myth of the Battle of Trenton
In the winter of 1776, with morale low, General George Washington's forces crossed the Delaware River and entered New Jersey on December 25.
The next morning, they attacked and defeated the British-hired Hessian forces stationed at Trenton.
The popular account of the Battle of Trenton holds that the Hessians were drunk from Christmas celebrations.
Modern historians dispute this.
David Hackett Fischer, a professor at Brandeis, suggests in his book Washington's Crossing that this version was encouraged by British officers and loyalists as a way of accounting for the embarrassing defeat.
It seems plausible, as well, that rumors of Hessian indulgence on the 25th might have circulated among Washington's troops, improving spirits prior to the battle; William Stryker's 1898 book on The Battles of Trenton and Princeton includes snippets from a so-labeled "Diary of an Office on Washington's Staff" with this intriguing entry:
Dec. 25 -- Christmas morning.
They make a great deal of Christmas in Germany, and no doubt the Hessians will drink a great deal of beer and have a dance to-night.
They will be sleepy to-morrow morning.
Washington will set the tune for them about daybreak.
The rations are cooked.
New flints and ammunition have been distributed.
Colonel Glover's fishermen from Marblehead, Mass., are to manage the boats just as they did in the retreat from Long Island.
The revolutionaries' victories at Trenton on December 26 and then Princeton on January 3 led to a tremendous upswing in morale on the American side and are now considered a turning point in the war.
The British, in the following months, became increasingly pessimistic about the conflict.
The World War I 'Christmas Truce'
One of the most touching moments of international Christmas spirit, it's still not entirely clear how the entirely unofficial "Christmas truce" came about.
On Christmas Eve in 1914, hostilities spontaneously ceased in several locations in Western Europe, as Christmas singing in the trenches turned to tentative spoken exchanges between German, British, French, and Belgian soldiers.
On Christmas Day, soldiers on both sides ventured into no-man's land to bury their dead and the one-time enemies exchanged food and drink.
Legend has it, with some evidence, soccer balls were even brought out into this otherwise lethal territory.
Devastating war shortly resumed for another four years.
Though the Christmas truce of 1914 is the famous and most well-established case, the University of Aberdeen announced in 2010 that one of its historians, Dr. Thomas Weber, had found a "letter written by a soldier of Scottish descent serving with a Canadian regiment, which suggests that festive ceasefires continued to take place throughout the war but were often downplayed in official war records."
Apparently "heavy artillery, machine gun, and sniper fire ... had been ordered in anticipation of new Christmas truces."
But what this letter showed, argued Weber, is that "[i]n fact, soldiers never tried to stop fraternising with their opponents during Christmas."
Pope Pius XII's 1942 Christmas Address Pleading for Peace
The Vatican drew criticism both before and after this radio address for its failure to denounce the German extermination of Jews, which by 1942 had become common knowledge among Allied officials and diplomats.
This December 24 address did discuss the war, as well as -- obliquely -- genocide, though with little specificity.
It has become one of the key texts for the debate over the Vatican's response to World War II.
Below, a section of the address, posted  in translation on the site of the Global Catholic Network, wherein the pope pled for peace.
The sentence appearing to discuss genocide is bolded:
[W]ho can see the end of this progressive demoralization of the people, who can wish to watch helplessly this disastrous progress?
Should they not rather, over the ruins of a social order which has given such tragic proof of its ineptitude as a factor for the good of the people, gather together the hearts of all those who are magnanimous and upright, in the solemn vow not to rest until in all peoples and all nations of the earth a vast legion shall be formed of those handfuls of men who, bent on bringing back society to its center of gravity, which is the law of God, aspire to the service of the human person and of his common life ennobled in God.
Mankind owes that vow to the countless dead who lie buried on the field of battle: The sacrifice of their lives in the fulfillment of their duty is a holocaust offered for a new and better social order.
Mankind owes that vow to the innumerable sorrowing host of mothers, widows and orphans who have seen the light, the solace and the support of their lives wrenched from them.
Mankind owes that vow to those numberless exiles whom the hurricane of war has torn from their native land and scattered in the land of the stranger; who can make their own the lament of the Prophet: "Our inheritance is turned to aliens; our house to strangers."
Mankind owes that vow to the hundreds of thousands of persons who, without any fault on their part, sometimes only because of their nationality or race, have been consigned to death or to a slow decline.
Mankind owes that vow to the many thousands of non-combatants, women, children, sick and aged, from whom aerial war-fare--whose horrors we have from the beginning frequently denounced--has without discrimination or through inadequate precautions, taken life, goods, health, home, charitable refuge, or house of prayer.
Mankind owes that vow to the flood of tears and bitterness, to the accumulation of sorrow and suffering, emanating from the murderous ruin of the dreadful conflict and crying to Heaven to send down the Holy Spirit to liberate the world from the inundation of violence and terror.
1964 Brink Hotel Bombing in Saigon
During the Vietnam War, a six-story hotel in central Saigon was used to house American officers.
Following the suicide of General Francis G. Brink, the first U.S. commander in Vietnam, on a visit to Washington, the hotel was renamed by its occupants in his honor.
On December 24, 1964, two Vietcong combatants in South Vietnamese Army uniforms drove into Saigon and to the Brink with a 200-lb charge in the trunk of one of their two cars.
Talking their way past various officials, they parked the car in a lot beneath the hotel and retreated to a nearby café, where they observed the massive explosion at 5:45 pm.
Two American officers were killed and 38 wounded.
Nguyen Thanh Xuan, one of the two men who carried out the bombing, was quoted years later in a PBS special as saying, "Our commanders had ordered us to attack the place when the most Americans were there.
And it was precisely as we had expected, since they were at the Brink's Hotel to plan their Christmas activities."
Former Marine Corps University professor Mark Moyar, however, in Triumph Forsaken , says instead that "the Viet Cong had been trying to kill comedian Bob Hope, who had just flown in to perform a Christmas show for the troops and was planning to stay at the Brink Hotel."
Unfortunately for the bombers, "Hope had not yet reached the hotel because he had been delayed by the unloading of his cue cards at the airport."
Apollo 8 Christmas Eve Broadcast
In this live television event in 1968, the crew of Apollo 8, the first manned mission to the Moon, showed photos of the Earth and Moon from the shuttle and took turns reading from the Book of Genesis.
Aside from making for fantastic television, the Christmas Eve broadcast took place in the context of the U.S.-Soviet space race, in which the U.S. had largely been lagging.
Though a religious reading was less out-of-place at the time then than it might be now, it was still notable enough to spark a lawsuit -- quickly dismissed -- alleging First Amendment violations.
The main message of the astronauts to American viewers may indeed have been "a Merry Christmas," but the episode isn't without tinges of ideology and politics.
The U.S.S.R., was, after all, an atheist state, as North Korea is today.
If Christmas lights on a border can be considered "psychological warfare" today, triumphant space travelers broadcasting Bible readings in 1968 could surely qualify as well.
Jump to Comments
About the Author
Latest Video
A Visceral Portrait of Life at the U.S.-Mexico Border
A short film captures the humanity of those at the center of the immigration debate.
Greyson Korhonen
Mar 15, 2016
Latest Slideshow
Mark Peterman
Georgia Education Innovation
Mark Peterman
Feb 8, 2016
About the Author
Heather Horn is a contributing writer for The Atlantic and a former senior associate editor at the magazine.
Twitter
Most Popular
Presented by
Ruven Afanador
The Obama Doctrine
Jeffrey Goldberg
The U.S. president talks through his hardest decisions about America’s role in the world.
Friday, August 30, 2013, the day the feckless Barack Obama brought to a premature end America’s reign as the world’s sole indispensable superpower—or, alternatively, the day the sagacious Barack Obama peered into the Middle Eastern abyss and stepped back from the consuming void—began with a thundering speech given on Obama’s behalf by his secretary of state, John Kerry, in Washington, D.C.
The subject of Kerry’s uncharacteristically Churchillian remarks, delivered in the Treaty Room at the State Department, was the gassing of civilians by the president of Syria, Bashar al-Assad.
Continue Reading
Joe Skipper / Reuters
A Very Good Night for Trump
David A. Graham
The Republican front-runner drew closer to the nomination, as Hillary Clinton added to her mounting lead in pledged delegates.
Tuesday night was a very good night for Donald Trump—but was it good enough?
The entertainer consolidated his lead in the Republican Party and drove Marco Rubio to drop out of the race .
Trump scored a huge win in Florida, taking the state’s 99 delegates and humiliating Rubio, a son of the Sunshine State who couldn’t win at home.
But Trump’s failure to beat John Kasich in Ohio will prolong the race—and increases the odds that Trump will not win the 1,237 delegates he needs to secure the GOP nomination outright over Kasich and Senator Ted Cruz.
Falling short would lead the party to a contested convention with unpredictable and volatile results.
Republicans are left to choose what sort of catastrophic conclusion they’d like for the primary campaign: a Donald Trump nomination?
Or a fractious, chaotic contested convention?
On Tuesday, GOP voters lurched uneasily toward the latter.
Continue Reading
AP
Nina Simone's Face
Ta-Nehisi Coates
The upcoming biopic about the singer proves that the world still isn’t ready to tell her story.
When I was kid, I knew what the worst parts of me were—my hair and my mouth.
My hair was nappy.
My lips were big.
Nearly every kid around me knew something similar of themselves because nearly every one of us had some sort of physical defect—dark skin, nappy hair, broad nose, full lips—that opened us up to ridicule from one another.
That each of these “defects” were representative of all the Africa that ran through us was never lost on anyone.
“Africa” was an insult—African bush-boogie, African bootie-scratcher etc.
Ethiopian famine jokes were all the rage back then.
Did we want to be white?
I don’t think so.
We didn’t want to look like Rob Lowe or Madonna.
We hated and mocked Michael Jackson’s aesthetic changes as viciously as we mocked each other.
What we wanted was to be on the right end of the paper bag tests.
We wanted hazel eyes.
We wanted wavy hair.
I had neither hazel eyes nor wavy hair.
But I also didn’t suffer in the same way that I saw other kids around me suffer.
I was not dark-skinned.
And, more importantly, I was not a girl.
Continue Reading
Phelan M. Ebenhack / AP
What Americans Don’t Get About Nordic Countries
Anu Partanen
When U.S. politicians talk about Scandinavian-style social welfare, they fail to explain the most important aspect of such policies: selfishness.
Bernie Sanders is hanging on, still pushing his vision of a Nordic-like socialist utopia for America, and his supporters love him for it.
Hillary Clinton, meanwhile, is chalking up victories by sounding more sensible.
“We are not Denmark,” she said in the first Democratic debate, pointing instead to America’s strengths as a land of freedom for entrepreneurs and businesses.
Commentators repeat endlessly the mantra that Sanders’s Nordic-style policies might sound nice, but they’d never work in the U.S.
The upshot is that Sanders, and his supporters, are being treated a bit like children—good-hearted, but hopelessly naive.
That’s probably how Nordic people seem to many Americans, too.
A Nordic person myself, I left my native Finland seven years ago and moved to the U.S. Although I’m now a U.S. citizen, I hear these kinds of comments from Americans all the time—at cocktail parties and at panel discussions, in town hall meetings and on the opinion pages.
Nordic countries are the way they are, I’m told, because they are small, homogeneous “nanny states” where everyone looks alike, thinks alike, and belongs to a big extended family.
This, in turn, makes Nordic citizens willing to sacrifice their own interests to help their neighbors.
Americans don’t feel a similar kinship with other Americans, I’m told, and thus will never sacrifice their own interests for the common good.
What this is mostly taken to mean is that Americans will never, ever agree to pay higher taxes to provide universal social services, as the Nordics do.
Thus Bernie Sanders, and anyone else in the U.S. who brings up Nordic countries as an example for America, is living in la-la land.
Continue Reading
Jim Young / Reuters
What Do Donald Trump Voters Actually Want?
Conor Friedersdorf
30 of the billionaire real-estate developer’s backers offer individual explanations for their support.
Last week, I asked Donald Trump supporters why they believe that the billionaire real-estate developer will treat them any better than the career politicians they mistrust.
The dozens of replies that I received from across the United States make up the largest collection I’ve encountered of Trump supporters setting forth their thinking in their own words.
And having read through this non-representative sample, I understand the candidate’s rise better than I did before.
Broadly speaking, the men and women who wrote fall into two categories: Those who earnestly believe that Trump is the best choice to lead America and those who are motivated by giddyness at the chaotic spectacle of his success.
Of course, anyone polling at the top of a major party is going to have supporters with all sorts of backgrounds and world views, and while the correspondence below includes several recurring themes, many of the rationales are singular.
Continue Reading
Carlo Allegri / Reuters
The 2016 U.S. Presidential Race: A Cheat Sheet
David A. Graham
After losing in Florida, Marco Rubio departs the race—a precipitous fall after a nearly as precipitous rise.
And then there were three.
After getting trounced in his home state of Florida on March 15, Marco Rubio dropped out of the Republican race in Miami.
The Rubio saga is a gripping one: He defied Republican Party bosses to win the 2010 Senate nomination in Florida, then went to Washington in the Tea Party wave.
Upon arriving, he boldly joined the push for immigration reform, only to watch that effort collapse.
Rubio was considered damaged goods—and certainly out of the presidential running once his one-time mentor and fellow Floridian Jeb Bush got in.
Rubio, perhaps knowing Bush’s weaknesses better than most, ignored that conventional wisdom and leapt into the race.
While he never topped polls, he managed to convince many pundits and party mandarins that he was waiting to peak at just the right time.
And as the field cleared and Donald Trump rose, it looked like he might have called it just right.
The Republican establishment started to coalesce around him.
But it became quickly clear that Trump was stronger than expected, and that Rubio didn’t have what it takes to beat him, and his support collapsed.
Continue Reading
Joe Skipper / Reuters
The Final Stage of Republican Grief
Molly Ball
With Donald Trump's hold on the nomination strengthening, some in the GOP establishment believe it’s time for acceptance.
There are times when you can look at Donald Trump, presidential candidate, and almost see something normal.
Or certain Republicans can, anyway.
Newt Gingrich—the former speaker of the House, a man who has spent his life seeing things others could not—can.
“Here you have a guy who is talented enough to come from a standing start and dominate every poll, who has won state after state, who dominates the media, who has brought thousands of Democrats and independents into the party,” Gingrich told me, referring to primaries in which non-Republicans are allowed to vote.
Under normal circumstances, he said, party leaders would be celebrating the arrival of such a figure.
But Trump is not a normal circumstance.
Even as he barrels toward the nomination—winning at least three of the five big states voting on Tuesday, knocking Marco Rubio out of the race, and claiming a large lead with more than half the delegates awarded—his party remains mostly in shock at his rise.
Over the past week, as he has refused to discourage the violence erupting at his events, many in his party say they are frightened by the specter of authoritarianism and the possibility of escalating conflict.
Continue Reading
Ben Earp / AP
The Resentment Powering Trump
Molly Ball
His supporters believe he is the only one who understands their marginalization.
After a young black protester was dragged out of one of his rallies last week—getting sucker-punched by a 78-year-old white man on his way out—Donald Trump looked out at the jeering, seething, booing crowd in front of him.
“Nasty, nasty!”
he said.
A plaintive look came over Trump’s face.
“Why are they allowed to do things that we’re not allowed to do, can you explain that to me?”
he said fretfully, pointing his right index finger upward and jouncing his hand up and down.
“Really a disgrace.”
It was a potent summary of the identity politics that seem to form a significant part of Trump’s appeal: the idea that they, the others, enjoy privileges, resources, and status to which we are denied access.
It is a sentiment I have repeatedly heard from the dozens of Trump supporters I have met over the past eight months I have spent covering his campaign.
More complicated than the overt bigotry of, say, the Ku Klux Klan, it is a form of racial resentment based on historic white entitlement and a backlash to the upsurge in leftist identity politics that has marked American politics in the age of Obama.
Continue Reading
Mark Ostow / New Hampshire magazine / The Atlantic
The Great Republican Revolt
David Frum
The GOP planned a dynastic restoration in 2016.
Instead, it triggered an internal class war.
Can the party reconcile the demands of its donors with the interests of its rank and file?
The angriest and most pessimistic people in America aren’t the hipster protesters who flitted in and out of Occupy Wall Street.
They aren’t the hashtavists of #BlackLivesMatter.
They aren’t the remnants of the American labor movement or the savvy young dreamers who confront politicians with their American accents and un-American legal status.
The angriest and most pessimistic people in America are the people we used to call Middle Americans.
Middle-class and middle-aged; not rich and not poor; people who are irked when asked to press 1 for English, and who wonder how white male became an accusation rather than a description.
You can measure their pessimism in polls that ask about their expectations for their lives—and for those of their children.
On both counts, whites without a college degree express the bleakest view.
You can see the effects of their despair in the new statistics describing horrifying rates of suicide and substance-abuse fatality among this same group, in middle age.
Continue Reading
Jonathan Ernst / Reuters
Why Credibility Matters
Stephen Sestanovich
It’s not just a Washington fetish, as Obama suggests.
There’s no getting around it: Barack Obama is a phenomenal arguer.
He’s got superb legal training; he’s got point-by-point debating skill; he’s got a feel for nuance; he’s got historical examples and counter-examples at the ready.
And, as a politician who’s been around the track a few times, he’s not above a little sophistry or rhetorical sleight-of-hand.
All these tools are on dazzling display in Jeffrey Goldberg’s extraordinary cover story in this month’s Atlantic.
“ The Obama Doctrine ” gives us the best picture we may ever have of how this president thinks and talks about foreign policy.
It will leave many readers wondering which candidate to succeed him could be half so persuasive.
And yet, for all his talents, Obama does not exactly make the sale.
To my mind, he doesn’t even fully acknowledge the nature of the problem he faces.
He claims to believe that the United States remains the “indispensable” global leader.
But he also wants to make indispensability less expensive and risky, more focused and discriminating.
He wants to discipline American policy by defining the country’s interests more narrowly and acting more deliberately.
He’d like, aides say, to leave his successor a nice “clean barn.”
Continue Reading
Obama's "Red Line" That Wasn't
Daniel Lombroso and Jeffrey Goldberg
Inside the president’s last-minute decision not to bomb Syria in 2013
Watch Video
Where Are the American Cities That Aren't Struggling?
The Editors
A tour of “flyover country” and its thriving towns
Watch Video
A Stunning Scale Model of Our Solar System, Drawn in the Desert
Jaclyn Skurie
A true illustration of our place in the universe
Watch Video
More Popular Stories
Show Comments
Subscribe
Get 10 issues a year and save 65% off the cover price.
Fraud Alert regarding The Atlantic
Newsletters+
The Atlantic
The Atlantic Daily
This Week
This Month
New Photo Galleries
Top Videos This Week
The Edge (Politics & Policy daily)
CityLab
Today’s Top Stories
This Week's Most Popular Stories
I want to receive updates from partners and sponsors.
Follow+
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Tumblr
Pinterest
RSS
App Store
About+
Masthead
FAQ
Press
Jobs
Shop
Books
Emporium
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Advertise
Advertising Guidelines
Terms and Conditions
Subscriber Help
Responsible Disclosure
Site Map
Copyright © 2016 by The Atlantic Monthly Group.
All Rights Reserved.
Close
Skip Ad >