NOV
MAR
Apr
16
2015
2016
2017
7 captures
10 Apr 15 - 27 Mar 16
Close Help
Saigon
VISIT PARK HYATT
Hyatt Gold Passport Sign In or Join   
Hyatt Gold Passport Sign In or Join   
Hyatt Gold Passport # / Username
Password
Remember Me
Forgot Password Help Signing In
Enjoy free nights with no blackout dates
Receive special recognition
Enjoy exclusive privileges
Join Hyatt Gold Passport
Close
map Language
FULL SITES
English
ABRIDGED SITES
Deutsch (Verkürzt)
Español (Abreviado)
Français (Abrégé)
Português (Condensado)
Русский (Сокращенная версия)
日本語 (簡略版)
简体中文 (精简版)
繁體中文 (精簡版)
한국어 (요약)
Close
Customer Service
hotel info
rooms
activities
dining
meetings + events
spa
Weddings
offers
Park Hyatt Saigon
Hotel Features >>
Stay connected with Free Wifi >>
Hotel Parking >>
Transportation >>
Concierge >>
Share
Facebook
Twitter
Youtube
Guest Photos
View Photos
View Photos
Concierge
Thao Ngo
Park Hyatt Saigon Concierge
concierge.saiph@hyatt.com
+84 8 3824 1234
I have worked as a Concierge ever since starting at Park Hyatt Saigon several years ago and love the challenges the job presents. Saigon is my city and my home and a vibrant one at that. I enjoy nothing more than introducing visitors to her beauty.
What's the most important thing you learned about travel?
One of the most important things I really enjoy learning about are the different cultures and people I encounter on my travels. I also enjoy learning about the different types of transportation that is provided when traveling between destinations. 
Working as a Concierge you get to meet so many different people and cultures as they visit your country and you get to impart a little of your culture back to them as well. I love learning about different cultures and personalities when I travel. Not to mention the different foods!
 
What is your favorite cultural place to walk to from your hotel?
Just a stone’s throw from the hotel is Saigon’s Central Post Office; the largest post office in Vietnam and one of my favorite buildings. Most people would never guess this circa 1891 building was built by the renowned architect Gustave Eiffel. Nearby the post office is the famous central Saigon Cathedral This architectural marvel was built in 1877 amazingly entirely out of imported material, the bricks were brought in by boat from Marseille. I am not sure exactly why they made the effort as we do have bricks in Vietnam!
 
You have VND 100,000 to spend on lunch, where would you eat? If you had VND 2,000,000?
A hearty bowl of Phở is one of my favorites and with VND 100,000 I would eat a bowl of Phở thập cẩm (with everything) at Phở Hòa in Pasteur street; One of the most renowned Phở eateries in Saigon. VND 100,000 is actually quite a lot of money for a bowl of Phở here in Saigon. Inside the bowl has beef brisket, filet, nerve, and beef balls and a healthy serve of vegetables and herbs. Quite a lot for a lady of my size! If I had VND 2,000,000 I wouldn’t go far from my own hotel lobby. On the mezzanine level of our hotel is Square One restaurant where the Foie Gras Terrine, Vietnamese style steamed black grouper and the black forest sphere are my absolute favorites.
 
What have guests been asking about lately? What kind of experiences are they looking for?
More and more guests are looking for more local and authentic experiences when travelling. Ways to interact more with local culture and to take away some really poignant memories. I like to suggest visiting some very local food stalls or trying a tour on the back of a scooter to understand more about how we locals do things here.
 
If you could learn to create one dish at the hotel restaurant, what would it be?
I have always wanted to learn how to make one of Chef Marco’s famous Italian pizza’s. With the light dough and crunchy crust the pizza is my favorite item on the menu in our Opera Restaurant and I would love to be able to make one at home for my family. 
 
What is your favorite piece of artwork in the hotel?
The Royal Lady or Qui Ba by Bui Huu Hung which hangs opposite the Park Lounge on our lobby level is by far my favourite. This painting represents Nam Phuong Hoang Hau the last Empress of Vietnam. Whenever I walk past, the grandness of both the Empress and the artwork always catches my eye.
 
Is there an interesting fact about your hotel that many people don't know?
One interesting fact which many people are not aware of is that Park Hyatt Saigon sits on the site of the old Brink Hotel. This hotel predominately housed US army officers during the 1950’s and 60’s. On the evening of December 24, 1964, during the Vietnam War, two Viet Cong operatives detonated a car bomb in the carpark below the hotel. The explosion killed two Americans, an officer and an NCO, and injured approximately 60, including military personnel and Vietnamese civilians. 
                                                            
Tell us about a rare and unique experience you have curated for guests in your location?
I really enjoy crafting personalized tours for guests when they visit the Concierge desk. Every guest is different, some love art, others enjoy food and some enjoy local and authentic experiences. I recently organised a private lunch for some guests home cooked in a local persons house in the Mekong Delta. They absolutely loved it. 
 
Is there one other Park Hyatt hotel and resort in particular you love or are dying to visit?
I would love to visit Park Hyatt Sydney as I have always dreamt of visiting Sydney’s beautiful harbour and Opera House. 
 
Make a Reservation
Arrive
Depart
  Please enter date in mmm/dd/yyyy format
Rooms
Adults
Children help
Age of Children
(at time of stay)
Please complete the mandatory fields.
 Special Rates (AAA, GOVT, ...)
Select a Special Rate help
None
Government
AAA / CAA Member
Senior
Special Offer Code
Corporate or Group Code
Best Rate Guaranteed  
 
Number of Nights: 
Our Hotel
Hotel Features
General Manager
Map and Directions
Parking
Business Services
Accessibility
Internet Access
Guest Services
Transportation
Concierge
2 Lam Son Square, District 1, Ho Chi Minh City (Saigon), Vietnam,
Tel: +84 8 3824 1234
Fax: +84 8 3823 7569
saigon.park@hyatt.com
Fact Sheet
Careers at this Hotel
LUXURY
PREMIUM
LIFESTYLE
MODERN ESSENTIAL
ALL INCLUSIVE
VACATION OWNERSHIP
Park Hyatt
Grand Hyatt
Andaz
Hyatt Place
Hyatt Zilara
Hyatt Residence Club
 
Hyatt Regency
Hyatt Centric
 
 
 
 
Hyatt Hotels
Unbound
Hyatt House
Hyatt Ziva
 
Corporate Sites
Careers
Vacation Ownership
Hyatt Development
Travel Agent Resources
Investor Relations
Corporate Responsibility
New Reservations
Find Hotels
Travel Packages
Redeem Gold Passport Points
Existing Reservations
Find / Modify Reservations
Check In / Check Out
Retrieve Hotel Bill
What's New
Breaking News
Newsroom
Hyatt Blog
New Hotels & Designs
Gifts & Products
Gift Cards
Incentives
Gift Registry
Explore More
Hyatt Destinations
Hyatt Mobile
Hyatt Resorts
Hyatt Hotels in Hawaii
Weddings
Hyatt Residences
© 2016 Hyatt Corporation
Privacy Policy - Your Privacy Rights
|
Terms & Conditions
|
Cookie Statement
|
Security & Safety
|
Site Map
|