Joanna Yeates murder: man, 32, arrested
08:50, 20 Jan 2011
Detectives today arrested a 32-year-old man on suspicion of murdering Joanna Yeates.
  Shares
Get daily news by email
Detectives today arrested a 32-year-old man on suspicion of murdering Joanna Yeates.
The suspect was detained in the early hours after police investigating the 25-year-old’s death uncovered fresh evidence.
Soon afterwards specialist search teams moved into the neighbouring flat to where Miss Yeates lived at 44 Canynge Road in Clifton, Bristol.
Dutch architect Vincent Tabak, 32, is registered as living at the address with his girlfriend.
Calls to his employers in Bath were referred to Avon and Somerset Police.
The force has not named the suspect, who is being held at an undisclosed location.
Workers erected scaffolding and green tarpaulin at the rear of the substantial converted Victorian property today.
The screen covers the entrance to flat two, where Mr Tabak lived, and the rear of Miss Yeates’s rented home.
Police sealed off both ends of Canynge Road as officers in white forensic outfits arrived at the property.
Miss Yeates’s father welcomed the latest development, which came almost five weeks after she disappeared.
Speaking at the family home in Ampfield, Hants, David Yeates, 63, said he was "pleased" the police investigation was "moving forward".
He said: "We know as much as you do. We were told at 6am this morning that someone was arrested on suspicion of Jo’s murder and their age."
Detective Chief Inspector Phil Jones, who is leading the inquiry, thanked Miss Yeates’s family and boyfriend for their support.
He said: "I would like to thank the public for their continued support for the investigation and the information they have provided to us.
"I would also like to pay tribute to Jo’s family and to Greg, who continue to be unfailing in their support to me and my team at what is an incredibly difficult and painful time for them."
The early morning arrest is believed to have taken place at a converted Victorian terraced house in Aberdeen Road, Clifton.
Two police officers, a man and a woman, were standing on guard outside the property this afternoon.
Mr Tabak, who worked as a people flow analyst for engineering firm Buro Happold, lived at flat one 44 Canynge Road with his girlfriend Tanja Morson.
The trilingual architect, an expert in the use of space in office buildings, could not be reached by telephone.
Eindhoven University of Technology confirmed Mr Tabak completed a PhD in "User Simulation of Space Utilisation" three or four years ago.
Miss Morson, an analyst at Dyson, in Malmesbury, Wiltshire, could also not be reached by telephone.
The arrest was the second to be made by detectives since Miss Yeates’s frozen body was found dumped in a lane on the outskirts of Bristol on Christmas Day.
Miss Yeates disappeared on Friday December 17 after going for Christmas drinks with colleagues at her architectural firm.
Her boyfriend Greg Reardon, 27, reported her missing after he returned to Bristol on December 19 following a weekend away visiting family in Sheffield.
A huge police operation swung into action after her body was found on a verge in Longwood Lane, Failand, North Somerset.
Police have said there was no evidence that she had been sexually assaulted but they have not ruled out a sexual motive.
It is understood they are investigating whether Miss Yeates’s body was taken from her home in a large bag or suitcase.
The Sun reported that the line of inquiry arose because there were no drag marks on Miss Yeates’s body or clothing.
It has also been claimed that police found three separate foreign DNA traces on different parts of the victim’s body.
Miss Yeates’s landlord Chris Jefferies, 65, was arrested on December 30 and questioned for three days on suspicion of murder before being released on bail.
The breakthrough came a day after police revealed that more than 300 people contacted detectives after a reconstruction of Miss Yeates’s final movements was filmed.
Her last journey was walked by an actress on Tuesday night and filmed for the BBC’s Crimewatch.
The reconstruction focused on what she did after she left her firm, BDP, in Bristol city centre.
She went first to the Bristol Ram pub on Park Street, where she spent around two hours with colleagues.
At around 8pm Miss Yeates left to make the 30-minute walk home to the Canynge Road flat she shared with her boyfriend.
She was captured on CCTV at a Waitrose supermarket at the Clifton Triangle and a branch of Tesco Express in Clifton village, where she bought a pizza.
Detectives said Miss Yeates made it home to her flat because her shoes, coat, mobile phone, purse and keys were found there.
The pizza, the wrapping and its box are still missing along with Miss Yeates’s ski sock. Tests later revealed she had not eaten the pizza.
Key events in ivestigation: next page
Key events in ivestigation
This is how events have unfolded following the disappearance of 25-year-old landscape architect Joanna Yeates from Bristol:
:: Friday December 17
6pm: Miss Yeates, 25, leaves the architectural firm where she worked with boyfriend Greg Reardon, 27, and joins colleagues in the Ram pub in Park Street for a drink.
8pm: She leaves the Ram to walk the 20-minute journey home from the city centre to Clifton.
8.10pm: Miss Yeates is caught on CCTV popping into a Waitrose supermarket in the Clifton Triangle.
8.30pm: She uses her mobile phone to ring her best friend Rebecca Scott and arranges to meet on Christmas Eve.
8.40pm: At a Tesco Express on Regent Street in Clifton Village – about a quarter of a mile from her flat – Miss Yeates buys a pizza, which is missing. She then visits a nearby off-licence to pick up some cider.
Police believe she returned home to her flat in Canynge Road, which she shared with Mr Reardon. A receipt from Tesco was found in the flat, along with a cream-coloured coat she had been wearing and her mobile phone and keys.
:: Sunday December 19
Mr Reardon reports Miss Yeates missing when he returns to Bristol from a weekend away visiting relatives in Sheffield.
:: Monday December 20
Avon and Somerset Police make their first appeal for information, saying they are concerned for her safety because it is out of character for her to go missing.
:: Tuesday December 21
Miss Yeates’s parents appeal directly to their daughter, saying: "Jo, whatever the reason that you have not been in touch over the last few days, we want you to know that we love you dearly and are desperate to know that you are safe and well."
:: Wednesday December 22
Mr Reardon makes an appeal, saying: "I desperately want her back – I thought we would be together forever."
Specialist officers search the couple’s flat, as well as the snowy Bristol Downs and Avon Gorge.
:: Thursday December 23
Miss Yeates’s parents make a second tearful appeal and reveal fears their daughter has been abducted.
Detectives say that when Miss Yeates was in the Tesco Express she bought a Tesco Finest tomato, mozzarella and basil pesto pizza. There was no trace of the pizza, the wrapping or the box in her flat.
:: Friday December 24
Police release new CCTV footage showing Miss Yeates buying the pizza.
:: Christmas Day, Saturday December 25
A couple walking their dogs in the Failand area of North Somerset, three miles from where Miss Yeates went missing, find a body.
:: Sunday December 26
Police announce they are "satisfied" the body found is that of Miss Yeates.
:: Monday December 27
The family of Miss Yeates lay flowers at the spot where her body was found.
:: Tuesday December 28
Police announce that Miss Yeates died as a result of strangulation and officially launch a murder investigation.
:: Wednesday December 29
It is reported that Miss Yeates’s landlord Chris Jefferies saw her leave her flat with two people on the night she disappeared. He later denies the sighting, saying it is a "serious distortion" of what he told police.
Police disclose new CCTV footage of Miss Yeates buying cider at an off-licence on the night she goes missing.
:: Thursday December 30
Police arrest Mr Jefferies on suspicion of murdering Joanna Yeates.
:: Friday December 31
Police reveal they have been granted more time to question Mr Jefferies.
:: New Year’s Day, Saturday January 1
Miss Yeates’s family issue a statement expressing their grief that their daughter has been "stolen" from them but say they are confident her killer will be caught.
Mr Jefferies is released on police bail pending further inquiries.
:: Sunday January 2
Police warn women not to walk home alone after dark as Miss Yeates’s killer remains at large.
:: Monday January 3
Police say they have found no evidence Miss Yeates was sexually assaulted, suggest more than one person may have been involved in the murder, appeal for help in tracing a 4x4 vehicle seen near to where her body was discovered and reveal they still do not know when and where she died.
:: Tuesday January 4
Detectives launch a national campaign on Facebook to appeal for witnesses.
:: Wednesday January 5
Police reveal they are investigating whether Miss Yeates could have been strangled with her own ski sock – which her killer might then have kept as a trophy.
:: Friday January 7
Officers talk to more than 200 people as they retrace Miss Yeates’s last steps three weeks after her disappearance.
:: Saturday January 8
Her parents say their daughter’s killer has robbed her of a future as a wife and mother. Her brother, Chris Yeates, says he has been left in a "surreal hole of despair".
:: Wednesday January 12
Miss Yeates best friend Rebecca Scott, the last person to speak to her, says she is "desperate to see justice done".
:: Monday January 17
Land Registry documents show the killer could have entered and left Miss Yeates’s flat without being seen by any of her neighbours.
:: Tuesday January 18
Mr and Mrs Yeates say their daughter probably knew her killer and urge anybody who knows somebody who has reacted strangely to the murder to come forward.
A reconstruction of the final steps of Miss Yeates was created for BBC’s Crimewatch programme.
Meanwhile, detectives said that tests revealed she did not eat the Tesco Finest pizza she was seen buying on her way home just before she went missing.
:: Wednesday January 19
Police said that more than 300 people made calls to the Operation Braid incident room since filming started on a reconstruction of the 25-year-old’s final movements.
:: Thursday January 20