The Joanna Yeates Case
Timeline
17 December 2010
At 8pm 25-year-old landscape architect Joanna Yeates, leaves the Bristol Ram pub in Park Street, Bristol and walks the 20 minutes to her home in Canynge Road.
19 December
Boyfriend Greg Reardon returns home from a weekend away.
He discovers Joanna is missing and calls the police.
21 December
Police search the area around Avon Gorge.
Joanna’s parents make an emotional appeal for her safe return.
23 December
Police believe a missing pizza may hold a vital clue to her disappearance.
25 December
At 9am a local couple walking their dog discover a woman’s body lying in a roadside verge off Longwood Lane, Failand.
26 December
Police believe the woman to be Joanna Yeates.
However due to her frozen body the post-mortem examination will take longer to complete.
27 December
Joanna Yeates’ family visit the location where her body was found.
28 December
Police reveal that Joanna Yeates was strangled.
A murder investigation is launched called Operation Braid.
30 December
Police arrest Chris Jefferies at his flat on suspicion of murdering Joanna Yeates.
His silver Chrysler car is removed by police from the road outside the property.
31 December
Detectives are granted more time to question Mr Jefferies.
1 January 2011
Joanna Yeates' family and her boyfriend issue a statement paying tribute to their “beautiful and talented daughter”, who was “stolen from us”.
They remain convinced that the police will catch her killer.
4 January
Police launch a Facebook campaign to find Joanna Yeates' killer.
5 January
Detectives issue a statement revealing that Joanna Yeates’ body was missing one grey ski sock when her body was discovered.
18 January
The final steps of Joanna Yeates are reconstructed for the BBC's Crimewatch programme.
20 January
A 32-year-old man is arrested on suspicion of murder.
21 January
Police are granted extra time to question the 32-year-old man.
22 January
Police charge 32-year-old Dutch national Vincent Tabak with Joanna Yeates' murder.
28 January
Joanna Yeates’ body is released to her family.
31 January
Tabak appears at Bristol Crown Court via a video link from HMP Long Lartin in Worcestershire.
He is remanded in custody until 4 May.
11 February
The funeral of Joanna Yeates takes place in St Mark's Church, Ampfield, Hampshire.
4 March
Mr Jefferies is released from police bail without charge.
5 May
At the Old Bailey Tabak admits the manslaughter of Joanna Yeates but denies murder.
4 October
The trial of Vincent Tabak gets underway.
28 October
Tabak is finally convicted of murder.
He is sentenced to life in prison with a minimum term of 20 years.