MAR
MAY
Jun
11
2014
2016
2017
5 captures
6 Sep 14 - 11 May 16
Close Help
Jobs Motors Property Directory Family Notices Travel Dating Book an Ad BuySell Photos
Login Register
My account
Logout
Facebook Twitter Newsletters
5 day forecast »
Our new FREE Wales Online app is here!
Search THOUSANDS of jobs at JobsWales
Most read
Live feeds
What's on
Sections Latest What's On Things To Do Family & Kids Food & Drink Comedy Music & Nightlife Theatre Film Shopping
Top What's On
This is how Ty Hafan's Rainbow Run unfolded in Barry Island... now sign up for the next one
Most Read in What's on
Cardiff will launch its very own 'field of poppies' to honour the war dead
This amazing bunkhouse has a slide between floors and you can hire it for your mates
These are the road closures in place for Velothon Wales 2016
19 gorgeously cute Welsh getaways for two
Trending Today Anthony Hopkins Michael Sheen Bryn Terfel Tom Jones Roald Dahl
Popular this week Beaches Things to do Wales Things to do Wales Restaurants
News
Sections Latest News Wales News UK News World News Crime Politics Health Nostalgia Education Farming Motors News Opinion
Top News
Drivers urged to take care on the roads as two accidents cause delays in appalling weather on M4
Most Read in News
Drivers urged to take care on the roads as two accidents cause delays in appalling weather on M4
Five arrested after Class A drug raid on Cardiff house
Watch the shocking moment a man was knocked out cold by a clown at the circus
Lucky shopper picked up a guitar for £100 in a charity shop – and found it was worth £1,900
Live updates as Ukip civil war continues and AMs choose their new presiding officer
Welsh police have taken up the 'running man' dance challenge...and it is brilliant
Trending Today Huw Lewis Leanne Wood Carwyn Jones The Queen Edwina Hart
Popular this week National Assembly election Tata job losses Crime Transport
Rugby
Football
Business
Sections Latest Business Business News Commercial Property Personal Finance Appointments Business Opinion Farming
Top Business
Staying in EU in UK's best interest, French ambassador tells business people in Cardiff
Most Read in Business
From start up to the FTSE 100 - Henry Engelhardt reflects on Admiral's amazing journey
The next steps for the South Wales Metro from the man who started the project rolling
Swansea's Castle Square could get new restaurants as part of plan to hand it over to a private developer
Tiny Rebel are releasing a home-brew kit that will make 36 pints
Trending Today Henry Engelhardt Stephen Crabb Edwina Hart Gerald Jones Aled Jones
Popular this week Tata job losses Finance Wales Economy Cardiff Airport Transport
Fun Stuff
In Your Area
North Wales
Mid Wales
South-East Wales
South-West Wales
Cardiff
Swansea
Anglesey
Blaenau Gwent
Bridgend
Caerphilly
Carmarthenshire
Ceredigion
Conwy
Cynon Valley
Denbighshire
Flintshire
Gwynedd
Merthyr Tydfil
Monmouthshire
Neath Port Talbot
Newport
Pembrokeshire
Powys
Rhondda
Pontypridd
Torfaen
Vale of Glamorgan
Wrexham
Trending Assembly election 2016 Tata job losses Crime Transport
Sport
Sections Latest Sport Rugby Football Cardiff City Swansea City Boxing Cricket Ice Hockey Other Sport Sport Opinion Fixtures & Results Fantasy Football
Top Sport
The Andy Howell verdict: Warren Gatland's selection was spot on, Wales will win nothing with kids in New Zealand
Most Read in Sport
The damning verdict on Wales from New Zealand... 'Warren Gatland's team lack firepower and mental strength'
The cold, hard facts that explain why Francesco Guidolin is set to stay on as Swansea City boss
Joe Ledley's Euro 2016 participation in doubt after Crystal Palace confirm fractured fibula
Cardiff City set to face Championship competition in race to sign Lex Immers from Feyenoord - reports
How Swansea City fans reacted to reports Francesco Guidolin is set to stay
Trending Today Warren Gatland Joe Ledley Francesco Guidolin Chris Coleman Leigh Halfpenny
Popular this week Six Nations Francesco Guidolin Wales Rugby Team Swansea City FC Cardiff City FC
Homes
TV
Food & Drink
Quizzes
Home
News
UK News
Joanna Yeates murder: man, 32, arrested
08:50, 20 Jan 2011
Updated
22:15, 21 Mar 2013
By WalesOnline
Detectives today arrested a 32-year-old man on suspicion of murdering Joanna Yeates.
Shares
Get daily news by email
Detectives today arrested a 32-year-old man on suspicion of murdering Joanna Yeates.
The suspect was detained in the early hours after police investigating the 25-year-old’s death uncovered fresh evidence.
Soon afterwards specialist search teams moved into the neighbouring flat to where Miss Yeates lived at 44 Canynge Road in Clifton, Bristol.
Dutch architect Vincent Tabak, 32, is registered as living at the address with his girlfriend.
Calls to his employers in Bath were referred to Avon and Somerset Police.
The force has not named the suspect, who is being held at an undisclosed location.
Workers erected scaffolding and green tarpaulin at the rear of the substantial converted Victorian property today.
The screen covers the entrance to flat two, where Mr Tabak lived, and the rear of Miss Yeates’s rented home.
Police sealed off both ends of Canynge Road as officers in white forensic outfits arrived at the property.
Miss Yeates’s father welcomed the latest development, which came almost five weeks after she disappeared.
Speaking at the family home in Ampfield, Hants, David Yeates, 63, said he was "pleased" the police investigation was "moving forward".
He said: "We know as much as you do.
We were told at 6am this morning that someone was arrested on suspicion of Jo’s murder and their age."
Detective Chief Inspector Phil Jones, who is leading the inquiry, thanked Miss Yeates’s family and boyfriend for their support.
He said: "I would like to thank the public for their continued support for the investigation and the information they have provided to us.
"I would also like to pay tribute to Jo’s family and to Greg, who continue to be unfailing in their support to me and my team at what is an incredibly difficult and painful time for them."
The early morning arrest is believed to have taken place at a converted Victorian terraced house in Aberdeen Road, Clifton.
Two police officers, a man and a woman, were standing on guard outside the property this afternoon.
Mr Tabak, who worked as a people flow analyst for engineering firm Buro Happold, lived at flat one 44 Canynge Road with his girlfriend Tanja Morson.
The trilingual architect, an expert in the use of space in office buildings, could not be reached by telephone.
Eindhoven University of Technology confirmed Mr Tabak completed a PhD in "User Simulation of Space Utilisation" three or four years ago.
Miss Morson, an analyst at Dyson, in Malmesbury, Wiltshire, could also not be reached by telephone.
The arrest was the second to be made by detectives since Miss Yeates’s frozen body was found dumped in a lane on the outskirts of Bristol on Christmas Day.
Miss Yeates disappeared on Friday December 17 after going for Christmas drinks with colleagues at her architectural firm.
Her boyfriend Greg Reardon, 27, reported her missing after he returned to Bristol on December 19 following a weekend away visiting family in Sheffield.
A huge police operation swung into action after her body was found on a verge in Longwood Lane, Failand, North Somerset.
Police have said there was no evidence that she had been sexually assaulted but they have not ruled out a sexual motive.
It is understood they are investigating whether Miss Yeates’s body was taken from her home in a large bag or suitcase.
The Sun reported that the line of inquiry arose because there were no drag marks on Miss Yeates’s body or clothing.
It has also been claimed that police found three separate foreign DNA traces on different parts of the victim’s body.
Miss Yeates’s landlord Chris Jefferies, 65, was arrested on December 30 and questioned for three days on suspicion of murder before being released on bail.
The breakthrough came a day after police revealed that more than 300 people contacted detectives after a reconstruction of Miss Yeates’s final movements was filmed.
Her last journey was walked by an actress on Tuesday night and filmed for the BBC’s Crimewatch.
The reconstruction focused on what she did after she left her firm, BDP, in Bristol city centre.
She went first to the Bristol Ram pub on Park Street, where she spent around two hours with colleagues.
At around 8pm Miss Yeates left to make the 30-minute walk home to the Canynge Road flat she shared with her boyfriend.
She was captured on CCTV at a Waitrose supermarket at the Clifton Triangle and a branch of Tesco Express in Clifton village, where she bought a pizza.
Detectives said Miss Yeates made it home to her flat because her shoes, coat, mobile phone, purse and keys were found there.
The pizza, the wrapping and its box are still missing along with Miss Yeates’s ski sock.
Tests later revealed she had not eaten the pizza.
Key events in ivestigation: next page
Key events in ivestigation
This is how events have unfolded following the disappearance of 25-year-old landscape architect Joanna Yeates from Bristol:
:: Friday December 17
6pm: Miss Yeates, 25, leaves the architectural firm where she worked with boyfriend Greg Reardon, 27, and joins colleagues in the Ram pub in Park Street for a drink.
8pm: She leaves the Ram to walk the 20-minute journey home from the city centre to Clifton.
8.10pm: Miss Yeates is caught on CCTV popping into a Waitrose supermarket in the Clifton Triangle.
8.30pm: She uses her mobile phone to ring her best friend Rebecca Scott and arranges to meet on Christmas Eve.
8.40pm: At a Tesco Express on Regent Street in Clifton Village – about a quarter of a mile from her flat – Miss Yeates buys a pizza, which is missing.
She then visits a nearby off-licence to pick up some cider.
Police believe she returned home to her flat in Canynge Road, which she shared with Mr Reardon.
A receipt from Tesco was found in the flat, along with a cream-coloured coat she had been wearing and her mobile phone and keys.
:: Sunday December 19
Mr Reardon reports Miss Yeates missing when he returns to Bristol from a weekend away visiting relatives in Sheffield.
:: Monday December 20
Avon and Somerset Police make their first appeal for information, saying they are concerned for her safety because it is out of character for her to go missing.
:: Tuesday December 21
Miss Yeates’s parents appeal directly to their daughter, saying: "Jo, whatever the reason that you have not been in touch over the last few days, we want you to know that we love you dearly and are desperate to know that you are safe and well."
:: Wednesday December 22
Mr Reardon makes an appeal, saying: "I desperately want her back – I thought we would be together forever."
Specialist officers search the couple’s flat, as well as the snowy Bristol Downs and Avon Gorge.
:: Thursday December 23
Miss Yeates’s parents make a second tearful appeal and reveal fears their daughter has been abducted.
Detectives say that when Miss Yeates was in the Tesco Express she bought a Tesco Finest tomato, mozzarella and basil pesto pizza.
There was no trace of the pizza, the wrapping or the box in her flat.
:: Friday December 24
Police release new CCTV footage showing Miss Yeates buying the pizza.
:: Christmas Day, Saturday December 25
A couple walking their dogs in the Failand area of North Somerset, three miles from where Miss Yeates went missing, find a body.
:: Sunday December 26
Police announce they are "satisfied" the body found is that of Miss Yeates.
:: Monday December 27
The family of Miss Yeates lay flowers at the spot where her body was found.
:: Tuesday December 28
Police announce that Miss Yeates died as a result of strangulation and officially launch a murder investigation.
:: Wednesday December 29
It is reported that Miss Yeates’s landlord Chris Jefferies saw her leave her flat with two people on the night she disappeared.
He later denies the sighting, saying it is a "serious distortion" of what he told police.
Police disclose new CCTV footage of Miss Yeates buying cider at an off-licence on the night she goes missing.
:: Thursday December 30
Police arrest Mr Jefferies on suspicion of murdering Joanna Yeates.
:: Friday December 31
Police reveal they have been granted more time to question Mr Jefferies.
:: New Year’s Day, Saturday January 1
Miss Yeates’s family issue a statement expressing their grief that their daughter has been "stolen" from them but say they are confident her killer will be caught.
Mr Jefferies is released on police bail pending further inquiries.
:: Sunday January 2
Police warn women not to walk home alone after dark as Miss Yeates’s killer remains at large.
:: Monday January 3
Police say they have found no evidence Miss Yeates was sexually assaulted, suggest more than one person may have been involved in the murder, appeal for help in tracing a 4x4 vehicle seen near to where her body was discovered and reveal they still do not know when and where she died.
:: Tuesday January 4
Detectives launch a national campaign on Facebook to appeal for witnesses.
:: Wednesday January 5
Police reveal they are investigating whether Miss Yeates could have been strangled with her own ski sock – which her killer might then have kept as a trophy.
:: Friday January 7
Officers talk to more than 200 people as they retrace Miss Yeates’s last steps three weeks after her disappearance.
:: Saturday January 8
Her parents say their daughter’s killer has robbed her of a future as a wife and mother.
Her brother, Chris Yeates, says he has been left in a "surreal hole of despair".
:: Wednesday January 12
Miss Yeates best friend Rebecca Scott, the last person to speak to her, says she is "desperate to see justice done".
:: Monday January 17
Land Registry documents show the killer could have entered and left Miss Yeates’s flat without being seen by any of her neighbours.
:: Tuesday January 18
Mr and Mrs Yeates say their daughter probably knew her killer and urge anybody who knows somebody who has reacted strangely to the murder to come forward.
A reconstruction of the final steps of Miss Yeates was created for BBC’s Crimewatch programme.
Meanwhile, detectives said that tests revealed she did not eat the Tesco Finest pizza she was seen buying on her way home just before she went missing.
:: Wednesday January 19
Police said that more than 300 people made calls to the Operation Braid incident room since filming started on a reconstruction of the 25-year-old’s final movements.
:: Thursday January 20
A 32-year-old man was arrested on suspicion of the murder of Miss Yeates.
WalesOnline
Recommended in UK News
Ty Hafan
This is how Ty Hafan's Rainbow Run unfolded on Barry Island beach... now sign up for the next one
North Wales Police
Two men leave the scene of collision after motorcyclist left with serious injuries
Penarth
Firefighters tackle blaze in sauna at Penarth Leisure Centre
UK News
Life bans for those who attacked Man Utd bus
Politics
Live updates as Ukip civil war continues and AMs choose their new presiding officer
Cardiff Council
Organisers say council charges will ruin street party plans for Queen's 90th birthday
Newport
A woman was taken to hospital after she was trapped in her car for over an hour
Most Read in News
Transport
Drivers urged to take care on the roads as two accidents cause delays in appalling weather on M4
Cardiff
Five arrested after Class A drug raid on Cardiff house
Blackwood
Watch the shocking moment a man was knocked out cold by a clown at the circus
Ty Hafan
Lucky shopper picked up a guitar for £100 in a charity shop – and found it was worth £1,900
North Wales Police
Welsh police have taken up the 'running man' dance challenge...and it is brilliant
Recommended on WalesOnline
Ty Hafan
This is how Ty Hafan's Rainbow Run unfolded on Barry Island beach... now sign up for the next one
European Union
European Commission blocks Three takeover of O2
Scarlets
Former Scarlets wing announces retirement to pursue career as a chartered accountant in the City of London
North Wales Police
Two men leave the scene of collision after motorcyclist left with serious injuries
Construction
Hale Homes' Mumbles development site has continued its winning streak and received another award
Wales Online
Follow Us
Contact Us
Send A Story
Advertise
The Editor
Journalists
Join us on social media.
For the latest local news straight to your Twitter, Facebook feed, e-mail inbox or tablet .
Twitter
@WalesOnline
@WalesRugby
@WelshSportLive
@CardiffOnline
E-Editions
Download our e-editions here.
Facebook
WalesOnline
Welsh Rugby News
Cardiff City
Swansea City
Newsletter
Sign up to our daily newsletter.
Contact us
Got a story in your area?
Is there something happening in your area you would like us to report on?
Email
newsdesk@walesonline.co.uk
Phone
Newsdesk: 029 2024 3630
Advertising enquiries: 029 2022 3333
Postal Address
WalesOnline,
Media Wales,
Six Park Street,
Cardiff,
CF10 1XR
Contacts
Newsdesk
029 2024 3630
newsdesk@walesonline.co.uk
WalesOnline: Steffan Rhys
029 2024 3644
steffan.rhys@walesonline.co.uk
Picturedesk: Rob Norman
029 2024 3649
rob.norman@walesonline.co.uk
Photosales: Saffron Herbert
029 2024 4330
saffron.herbert@walesonline.co.uk
Competitions and promotions: Sally Krouma
029 2024 4314
sally.krouma@walesonline.co.uk
Work experience queries
ciaran.jones@walesonline.co.uk
Organised a special event?
Tell us about it and, if possible, send us a picture
Contact
David Prince
Phone
029 2024 3620
Email
communities@walesonline.co.uk
Send a story
Email
newsdesk@walesonline.co.uk
Phone
029 2024 3630
Postal Address
Newsdesk,
Media Wales,
Six Park Street,
Cardiff
CF10 1XR
Advertise with WalesOnline
We reach over 5m unique users a month* with dedicated coverage of all things Welsh.
To book an advert with WalesOnline call 029 2024 4002, or email annamarie.goddard@trinitymirror.com .
WalesOnline is part of Media Wales, publisher of the Western Mail, South Wales Echo, Wales on Sunday and the seven Celtic weekly titles, offering you unique access to our audience across Wales online and in print.
For all general advertising enquiries please ring 029 2022 3333, or for recruitment advertising, please ring 029 2000 7207.
*Omniture, average monthly unique users, July-Dec 2015
The Editor
Paul Rowland
Editor, WalesOnline
Email
paul.rowland@walesonline.co.uk
Paul has been editor of WalesOnline since March 2016.
He was previously digital editor of Media Wales.
He has been with the company since 2005 and started his career as a reporter on the Western Mail.
Journalists
David Williamson
Political Editor
Martin Shipton
Chief Reporter
Cathy Owen
Breaking News Editor
Gareth Evans
Education Correspondent
Mark Smith
Health Correspondent
Ruth Mosalski
Local Government Correspondent
Rachael Misstear
West Wales Editor
Darren Devine
North Wales Correspondent
Robin Turner
Swansea Correspondent
Karen Price
Arts Editor
Sion Barry
Business Editor
Paul Abbandonato
Head of Sport
Jon Doel
Football Editor
Delme Parfitt
Rugby Editor
Chris Wathan
Swansea City Correspondent
Steve Tucker
Cardiff City Correspondent
Simon Thomas
Rugby Correspondent
Andy Howell
Rugby Correspondent
News
Wales News
Business
UK News
World News
Politics
Crime
Health
Education
Farming
Motors
News Opinion
Business
Business News
Commercial Property
Personal Finance
Appointments
Business Opinion
Sport
Rugby
Football
Cardiff City
Swansea City
Boxing
Ice Hockey
Cricket
Rugby League
Tennis
Golf
Cycling
Athletics
Sport Opinion
What's On
Arts & Culture
Comedy
Family & Kids
Film & TV
Food & Drink
Music & Nightlife
Lifestyle
Showbiz
Fashion
Food & Drink
Welsh Homes
Nostalgia
Lifestyle Opinion
In Your Area
Anglesey
Blaenau Gwent
Bridgend
Caerphilly
Carmarthenshire
Ceredigion
Conwy
Denbighshire
Flintshire
Gwynedd
Merthyr Tydfil
Monmouthshire
Neath Port Talbot
Newport
Pembrokeshire
Powys
Rhondda
Cynon Valley
Pontypridd
Torfaen
Vale of Glamorgan
Wrexham
View All Locations
Useful Links
Contact Us
About Us
Subscriptions
Download our e-editions
Letters To The Editor
Echo Home Delivery
Advertise with us
Puzzles
Goal Time
How to Complain
Corrections & Clarifications
Google Survey
Reader Panel
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
RSS Feeds
Archive
Buy, Sell & Tell
Jobs
Motors
Find a garage
Property
Business Directory
Family Notices
Travel
Dating
Book an Ad
BuySell
Reader Offers
Public Notices
View:
Desktop
Mobile
© Media Wales Ltd