Apr
MAY
Jun
11
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
11 May 16 - 11 May 16
Close Help
Jobs Motors Property Directory BuySell Family Notices Dating Book an Ad
Login Register
My account
Logout
Facebook Twitter GooglePlus Newsletters
Family notices See family notices for the North East
Download our mobile and tablet apps
Most read
What's on
Sections Latest What's On Things to do Family & Kids Food & Drink Comedy Music & Nightlife Arts & Culture Film Travel Shopping
Top What's On
Bryan Ferry on returning home to play the Mouth of the Tyne Festival
Most Read in What's on
Stone Roses lemon appears in Newcastle leading fans to speculate over new album
Newcastle nightlife: 25 glamorous photos from the Diamond Strip bars & beyond
Countdown to Hoppings 2016 in Newcastle has begun
The Flying Scotsman in Newcastle RECAP: Updates as legendary train steams through North East
Stone Roses lemon poster appears in Newcastle city centre - but what could it mean?
Trending Today Bryan Ferry Geordies Jade Thirlwall Perrie Edwards Sarah Millican
Popular this week Flying Scotsman Days Out Summer Magic Weekend Northern Lights
News
Sections Latest News North East News UK News World News Health Politics Crime Education History Traffic & Travel Motors News Opinion
Top News
Run Geordie Run fundraiser clocks up £250,000 on around-the-world charity challenge
Most Read in News
Trespassers on Byker Bridge RECAP: Metro disruption caused by viaduct protest
North East news LIVE: A19 closed and air ambulance scrambled after serious crash
Where do shoplifters like to unite in Newcastle city centre? We reveal crime hotspot
Idols bouncer broke man's cheek bone and eye socket - all because he danced on a podium
Wallsend victim of one punch attack coming to terms with injuries which put his life in the balance
We tested Newcastle's kindness by asking people if we could borrow their tie for a job interview
Trending Today Paul Gascoigne Nick Forbes Alan Shearer Geordies Cheryl Cole
Popular this week Local Elections Vera Baird North East Weather Missing People Devolution
Business
Sections Business News Commercial Property Farming Business Opinion
Top Business
Save BHS campaign could be in hot water after projecting ad onto Angel of the North
Most Read in Business
Work starts to transform the Boiler Shop in Newcastle's Stephenson Quarter
Save BHS campaign could be in hot water after projecting ad onto Angel of the North
Pie war heats up as Dicksons plans 5am opening hours at shop opposite Greggs
Trending Today George Osborne MP Nick Forbes Mike Ashley Chi Onwurah Nick Brown
Popular this week Northern Powerhouse Let's Work Together Business Supplements Top 200 Your Money
Newcastle United
Sunderland AFC
Property
In Your Area
County Durham
Gateshead
Newcastle
North Tyneside
Northumberland
South Tyneside
Sunderland
Ashington
Bedlington
Benton
Benwell
Birtley
Blaydon
Blyth
Boldon
Byker
Chester-le-Street
Consett
Cramlington
Denton
Dunston
Durham City Centre
Fenham
Gateshead Town Centre
Gosforth
Heaton
Hebburn
Hexham
Jarrow
Jesmond
Morpeth
New York
Newcastle City Centre
North Shields
Ponteland
Ryton
South Shields
Stanley
Teams
Tynemouth
Walker
Wallsend
Washington
West Denton
Whickham
Whitley Bay
Trending The Flying Scotsman Days Out Newcastle City Centre Northumbria Police Geordies Missing People
Sport
Sections Latest Sport Football Newcastle United Sunderland AFC Rugby Union Cricket Speedway Basketball Athletics Other Sport Fantasy Football
Top Sport
Tino Asprilla unleashes verbal volley at Newcastle United board for allowing the club to decline
Most Read in Sport
Rafa Benitez on why he accepted Newcastle 'challenge' - and how survival is still possible
Tino Asprilla unleashes verbal volley at Newcastle United board for allowing the club to decline
Newcastle United news LIVE: Toon fans keep their fingers crossed ahead of Sunderland vs Everton clash
Hamann on why Newcastle are the one club Rafa Benitez would 'go into Championship with'
Sunderland's opponents Everton urged to come out fighting on big night for Newcastle
Trending Today Rafa Benitez Faustino Asprilla Roberto Martinez Sam Allardyce Steve McClaren
Popular this week Karl Darlow Rafa Benitez Gateshead FC Newcastle Falcons Newcastle Eagles
TV News
Traffic & Travel
Food & Drink
Home
News
North East News
Asda
Joanna Yeates' killer Vincent Tabak contacted prostitutes in Newcastle
15:24, 28 Oct 2011
Updated
18:31, 26 Feb 2013
By Evening Chronicle
TWISTED killer Vincent Tabak was jailed for life today after being convicted of murdering Joanna Yeates for sexual thrills.
  Shares
Get daily news by email
TWISTED killer Vincent Tabak was jailed for life today after being convicted of murdering Joanna Yeates for sexual thrills.
He must serve a minimum of 20 years for strangling his next-door neighbour before spinning a web of lies and deceit to cover his tracks.
Relatives of the 25-year-old victim watched from the public gallery as jurors rejected Tabak’s claim that he did not mean to kill her.
Instead they found he was a "shrewd“ liar who had been sexually aroused during the attack.
The verdict comes despite prosecutors being blocked from telling jurors about Tabak’s sordid sex secrets.
He strangled Miss Yeates after becoming obsessed with violent sex and pornography, it can now be revealed.
Videos recovered from his laptop depicted blonde women being throttled during sex.
Just two weeks before murdering the landscape architect he also paid for sex with a prostitute during a business trip to Los Angeles, police discovered.
Dutchman Tabak, 33, throttled Miss Yeates in a violent confrontation at her flat in Clifton, Bristol, on December 17 last year.
The petite blonde suffered 43 injuries during a desperate fight for life as he used his burly 6ft 4in frame to overpower her.
Miss Yeates, who did not even know her killer’s name, is believed to have been dead within about 20 seconds of Tabak grabbing her neck.
For reasons only he knows, Tabak kept her sock and took a Tesco Finest pizza she had bought earlier that night as she walked home from the pub.
He then immediately launched into an elaborate chain of acts to construct an alibi and cover his tracks.
Tabak carried Miss Yeates’s body in his arms back to his flat next door and put her in his bicycle bag. In a bizarre twist he then went night shopping in Asda with her in his car boot.
While wandering the aisles - picking up rock salt, crisps and beer - Tabak texted his girlfriend to say he was bored.
But in reality he was plotting the best way to dispose of Miss Yeates’s body.
Within an hour he had dumped her partially-clothed body in the foetal position on a snowy verge in Failand, near Bristol.
Just 24 hours later he was drinking champagne with friends as he embarked on a life of lies that would lead police to dismiss him as a concerned neighbour.
He scoured the internet for clues to how he could get off the hook before and after her snow-covered body was found by dog walkers on Christmas Day.
It is believed he may even have been getting sexual satisfaction from looking up pictures of Miss Yeates.
Detectives who recovered his laptops found he was looking at pornographic websites within seconds of looking at pages surrounding the inquiry into the death of Miss Yeates.
In the hours, days and weeks following her death, Tabak repeatedly lied about his actions to his girlfriend, his family, police and even his legal team.
Tabak also paid for sex with a call girl while on a business trip to Los Angeles less than two weeks before killing Miss Yeates, officers found.
He also contacted prostitutes in Newcastle last year - though it is not known if any transactions took place.
Tabak, who had only left university in 2007 at 29 after 11 years of study, had also shown an interest in prostitutes during a business trip to Newcastle in May of last year, prosecutor Nigel Lickley QC said.
He logged on to the adultwork website and made several phone calls to escort agencies in the North East.
"At this stage there is a clearly an interest in escorts and telephone calls to numbers linked to that,” Mr Lickley told the judge in the absence of the jury.
"The inference we seek to draw is that this determined activity and going as far as making telephone contact in Newcastle leads to the clear picture that the defendant was interested in escort services in so far as to make those calls.”
“Vincent Tabak is very clever,” Mr Lickley added. "He is intelligent and highly educated. He is dishonest, he is deceitful and he is a liar.
"He is when he chooses to be very calculating. Making decisions, covering his tracks.
"There is a word for it - that is shrewd.”
He accused Tabak of being "calculating“ in the months after the killing - lying continuously in emails to his girlfriend and family.
But he began to slip up - changing his story over and over again as more evidence emerged as to his guilt - answering "I can’t remember“ more than 80 times to difficult questions during his three-week trial at Bristol Crown Court.
From the witness box he wept as he apologised to Miss Yeates’s relatives for putting them through hell.
The bespectacled engineer - speaking with a shrill Dutch accent - said he would be haunted for the rest of his life "no matter what sentence I get“.
But the jury failed to be swayed by Tabak’s tears as he had robbed relatives of a much-loved girlfriend, sister and daughter.
Miss Yeates and boyfriend Greg Reardon were described by friends as "the perfect couple“.
On the night of her death, she had told landscape architect colleagues over Christmas drinks how she was dreading being without Mr Reardon for the weekend.
Little did she know that Mr Reardon, and parents, David and Teresa, would soon be facing life without her.
Mr Reardon, who had been visiting relatives in Sheffield, told of his rising sense of panic as he realised she had disappeared after returning to an empty flat.
And after a massive police hunt and nationwide media coverage, dog walkers found her frozen corpse dumped on a verge in a lane in Failand, North Somerset, on Christmas Day.
NewcastleChronicle
Recently Published
Limes are weapons, Asda customer told
COR limey... this Asda be a joke! Catering chef Marisa Zoccolan was almost banned from buying two limes because they could be classed as a weapon.
Thirteen thieves caught in Benwell police stings
Police launch crackdown on crime over Christmas
Previous Articles
Family welcomes Blyth murder trial verdicts
STILL grieving for popular Christopher Chapman, his family say they have seen justice done for his brutal murder.
Teenage girls 'murdered Blyth man amid row'
Hartlepool attacker jailed for stabbing
Related Tags
In The News
Crime
Events
Christmas
Organisations
Asda
Tesco
Recommended in North East News
Newcastle University
Newcastle student Emma McCormick set up 'joke' GoFundMe page to fund lifestyle - and raises £1,600
Wallsend
Four cars destroyed in suspected arson attack in Wallsend street
MetroCentre
Fun move by intu Metrocentre nets it a top marketing award
Mark Allison
Run Geordie Run fundraiser clocks up £250,000 on around-the-world charity challenge
Paul Gascoigne
Ex-Newcastle United ace Paul Gascoigne helps carry the coffin at his nephew's funeral in Dunston
Most Read in News
North East News
Trespassers on Byker Bridge RECAP: Metro disruption caused by viaduct protest
Traffic & Travel
North East news LIVE: A19 closed and air ambulance scrambled after serious crash
Newcastle City Centre
Where do shoplifters like to unite in Newcastle city centre? We reveal crime hotspot
Newcastle Crown Court
Idols bouncer broke man's cheek bone and eye socket - all because he danced on a podium
Newcastle City Centre
We tested Newcastle's kindness by asking people if we could borrow their tie for a job interview
Recommended
Great North Museum: Hancock
Why it'll be 'adults only' at Great North Museum: Hancock during The Late Shows
Durham Cathedral
Moving Somme commemoration to be a highlight of Durham's brass festival
Newcastle University
Newcastle student Emma McCormick set up 'joke' GoFundMe page to fund lifestyle - and raises £1,600
Wallsend
Four cars destroyed in suspected arson attack in Wallsend street
MetroCentre
Fun move by intu Metrocentre nets it a top marketing award
Newcastle Chronicle
Follow Us
Contact Us
Send A Story
Advertise
The Editor
Journalists
Join us on social media
For the latest local news straight to your Twitter, Facebook feed or e-mail inbox.
Facebook
Newcastle Chronicle
Newcastle United
Sunderland AFC
What's On
Newsletter
Sign up to our daily newsletter
Twitter
@EveningChron
@ChronCommunity
@ChronicleNUFC
@ChronicleSAFC
@WhatsOnNE
Contact us
General Enquiries
Phone
0191 232 7500
Postal Address
The Chronicle
Groat Market
Newcastle upon Tyne
NE1 1ED
Customer Services
0191 201 6000
Photo Sales
trinitymirrornewcastle.newsprints.co.uk
Marketing
Vikki Hawkins
0191 201 6065
vikki.hawkins@trinitymirror.com
Editorial Contacts
Chronicle Newsdesk
0191 201 6446
ec.news@ncjmedia.co.uk
Chronicle Picturedesk
0191 201 6125
ec.photos@ncjmedia.co.uk
Digital Editor
Helen Dalby
0191 204 3364
helen.dalby@ncjmedia.co.uk
Got a story in your area?
Is there something happening in your area you would like us to report on?
Chronicle Newsdesk
0191 201 6446
community@ncjmedia.co.uk
Organised a special event?
Tell us about it and, if possible, send us a picture.
Community Editor
0191 201 6313
community@ncjmedia.co.uk
Send a story
Email
ec.news@ncjmedia.co.uk
Phone
0191 201 6446
Postal Address
The Chronicle,
Groat Market,
Newcastle Upon Tyne,
NE1 1ED
Advertising Department
Please visit http://www.trinitymirrorne.co.uk for the latest information about our audience, advertising solutions and rates. Alternatively please contact
Regional Business Development Manager
Josh Holmes
0191 201 6167
josh.holmes@trinitymirror.com
GENERAL ADVERTISING
Retail Ads Group Head
Paul Hardcastle
0191 204 3344
paul.hardcastle@trinitymirror.com
ADVERTISING
Classified Ads Group Head
Lee Crilley
0191 206 7307
lee.crilley@trinitymirror.com
RECRUITMENT ADVERTISING
Regional Account Manager
Andy Lay
0191 206 6344 or 07554774064
andy.lay@trinitymirror.com
The Editor
Darren Thwaites
Editor, The Chronicle
Editor-in-Chief, Trinity Mirror North East
Contact
darren.thwaites@trinitymirror.com
Darren was appointed editor of the Chronicle in September 2011, following a six-year spell as editor of the Evening Gazette in Teesside.
He has held a number of senior roles on regional newspapers across England, Scotland and Wales over the last 15 years and is now editor-in-chief of Trinity Mirror North East.
Journalists
Craig Thompson
Chief Reporter
Sophie Doughty
Crime Reporter
Tony Henderson
Environment Reporter
Mike Kelly
News Features & Campaigns
Gordon Barr
Entertainment Editor
Lee Ryder
Chief Sports Writer
James Hunter
Sunderland AFC Writer
Contact Us
Contact Us
News
North East News
Traffic & Travel
Health
Politics
Crime
Education
History
Motors
UK News
World News
News Opinion
Lifestyle
Celebs
Travel
Nostalgia
Competitions
Food & Drink
Lifestyle Opinion
Sport
Football
Newcastle United FC
Sunderland AFC
Rugby Union
Athletics
Basketball
Cricket
Speedway
Rugby League
Angling
Boxing
Ice Hockey
Sport Opinion
What's On
Arts & Culture
Comedy
Family & Kids
Film & TV
Food & Drink
Music & Nightlife
In Your Area
Ashington
Benwell, Scotswood & Elswick
Consett
County Durham
Gateshead
Gosforth
Low Fell
Morpeth
Newcastle City Centre
North Shields
South Shields
Sunderland
Walker
Wallsend
Whitley Bay
Useful Links
Our RSS feeds
Contact Us
About Us
Subscriptions
Advertise with us
Puzzles
Goal Time
How to Complain
Corrections & Clarifications
Google Survey
Reader Panel
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Archive
Buy, Sell & Tell
Jobs
Motors
Find a garage
Property
Business Directory
BuySell
Family Notices
Reader Offers
Dating
Book an Ad
Travel
Buy a Photo
Public Notices
View:
Desktop
Mobile
© Trinity Mirror North East