Ignore
Ashford v. Thornton: How procedure should appropriately inconvenience plaintiffs
Below is the last section of a long post I just made over at the OSTK board.
It seemed apropos to this group, too.
-al
...
TORT REFORM
During the break in the hearing, I went across the street to the law library to look up an interesting decision I had heard about that was recently made by the King's Bench over in England: William Ashford vs. Abraham Thornton, decided April 16, 1818.
(Okay, so the year 1818 doesn't sound very recent, but in the grand scheme of things it is: the last two centuries are only the most recent 20% or so of the ca. 1000-year jurisprudence of the English courts.)
In a case somewhat reminiscent of California v. Orenthal J. Simpson, a large and rich man (Thornton) was prosecuted by the state for the brutal murder of a woman to whom he was romantically linked.
The case drew significant media attention, and the defendant hired the finest lawyers available.
There was a large amount of physical evidence, including footprints matching distinctive shoes worn by the defendant, but there was no murder weapon, nor any witnesses to the murder itself.
There was widespread public dissatisfaction when Thornton was acquitted by the jury.
He was then named as the defendant in a private lawsuit brought by the dead woman's brother (Ashford).
This second case was Ashford v. Thornton.
Here's where the parallels to the Simpson case end: in the private suit, the defendant invoked his ancient right to trial by combat.
In such a trial, the two parties wage a battle with bludgeons, until one of them is dead or sufficiently maimed.
The theory, of course, is that whoever is right will be imbued by God with sufficient might to prevail.
The plaintiff, who was physically no match for the imposing defendant (or at least, he appeared outmatched, to those who cynically believed that God would take a laissez-faire approach to the trial), objected that there hadn't been any trials by combat for centuries, and that surely this obsolete practice should not be revived.
The four-judge bench ruled unanimously in favor of the defendant's right to choose the combat option.
Justice Sir John Bayley opined (note: in the following, the word "appeal" refers to an "appeal of felony", a type of criminal case brought by a private party, which is completely different from the modern "appeal", i.e., a review by a higher court of the decision of an inferior court):
This mode of proceeding, by appeal, is unusual in our law, being brought, not for the benefit of the public, but for that of the party, and being a private suit, wholly under his controul.
It ought, therefore, to be watched very narrowly by the Court; for it may take place after trial and acquittal on an indictment at the suit of the king; and the execution under it is entirely at the option of the party suing, whose sole object it may be to obtain a pecuniary satisfaction.
One inconvenience attending this mode of proceeding is, that the party who institutes it must be willing, if required, to stake his life in support of his accusation.
(Ashford v. Thornton, 1 B. & Ald.
405 , 457 , 106 Eng.
Rep. 149, 168 (1818), emphasis added)
The plaintiff responded by withdrawing his suit.
I do sometimes wish that more plaintiffs today were similarly "inconvenience[d]", and were required to have this level of commitment in order to proceed.
(I imagine that Patrick Byrne is one of the few plaintiffs who would be crazy enough not to be deterred by such a requirement, and I respect that about him.)
* * *
Further reading:
Maitland, Frederic W. (1894), Social England (Edited by Traill, Henry D.), London: Cassell & Co.
Google Books Id rWsDAAAAYAAJ .
(See pages 285-299, "The History of Trial by Jury")
Neilson, George, Trial By Combat (1890).
Glasgow: W. Hodge & Co..
Google books Id 4VEYAAAAMAAJ .
See page 329 for gauntlet fashion tips:
[Abraham Thornton] appeared before Lord [Chief Justice] Ellenborough and three other judges.
When asked to plead, he replied 'Not guilty, and I am ready to defend the same by my body.'
Then he threw down a gauntlet without either fingers or thumbs, made of white tanned skin, ornamented with sewn tracery and silk fringes, crossed by a narrow band of red leather, with leathern tags and thongs for fastening — a gauntlet as strange as the occasion, its white leather perhaps a reminiscence of the sheepskin armour of early centuries.