7th APRIL 2015
Compiled by Stephen Birch, photographs from Private collection and Birmingham Archives.
Easter Holiday Compilations
TYBURN HOUSE & THE MARY ASHFORD TRAGEDY
In the year 1817 a tragedy occurred within the borders of Erdington, which made the area the talk of the country.
On the evening of Whit Monday, May 27th 1817, a dance took place at the old Tyburn Inn, which was attended by the lads and lasses of the farms and countryside.
Among them was an attractive named Mary Ashford, daughter of a small farmer living between Walmley and Sutton.
Unfortunately she was unaccompanied by any male relatives or friends, which was unwise as the tavern was notorious for its wild revelry with excessive eating and drinking with at times, unrestrained sexual activity.
Soon after midnight she left the the Tyburn House with a young farmer named Abraham Thornton, of Castle Bromwich.
She went to Erdington to the home of relatives, where she changed some of her clothes and rested until 4 o'clock.
She then set off for home, carrying her dress from the night before in a bundle; She was seen in Bell Lane (orphanage Road today) taking the direction of Penn's Lane.
At six o'clock her bundle was spotted by a workman near a pond in a field on the right hand side of Penn's Lane, and soon afterwards her body, bearing marks of violence, was dragged from the water.
Around the edge of the pool the damp soil showed a number of footprints and indications of a struggle.
Thornton was arrested and charged with murdering the unfortunate girl.
He had paid her much attention at the dance, and had been heard to express sinister designs upon her chastity.
He had also been seen with her with in a short time of the murder.
He was committed for trial, but was finally acquitted following a statement giving him an alibi.
Then Mary Ashford's brother William Ashford, took out a private summons against Thornton and a fresh trial began.
The trial is historical as it was the last in England when "wager of battle" (Challenge to duel) was demanded in an English court.
The following is a local newspaper report at the time:----
"An immense crowd assembled in the Court of King's Bench on Monday morning, under the expectation that Thornton would be tried.
At ten, Thornton was put to the bar.
On being asked whether he was or was not guilty of the murder, Mr Reader handed a paper to Thornton, from which he read the following plea: 'I am Not guilty, and I am ready to defend the same by my body!'
He then threw a yellow glove, as his gaunlet upon the floor of the Court.
Mr Clarke, the counsel for the appellant, moved that the appellant should appear in Court.
William Ashford then took his station in the Court.
He was a lad, apparently about thirteen years of age, very slenderly made and rather short.
Mr. Clarke then expressed a hope that the Court would not permit a battle to be waged, seeing how unable a young man like Ashford was to contend with a man so robust as Thornton.
The Court seemed to doubt whether they had a discretionary power in the case; it was however, at length agreed that a counter plea should be put in, and that the argument upon it should be heard on Saturday."
Following his acquittal, Abraham Thornton went to America, the Yentonians and neighbours of Erdington made it too unpleasant for him to remain in the area in comfort.
He is said to have made his money in the coast fishing trade.
He married, had children, and died around 1860.
Soon after the the court case, 'wager by battle' was abolished by parliament, and so the case made Erdington forever a part of English legal history, it is known as 'Ashford v. Thornton'.
1.
THE ORIGINAL TYBURN HOUSE, KINGSBURY ROAD.
where Mary Ashford attended the dance
2.
THE SCENE OF THE MURDER Penns Lane 1817 by Samuel Lines
3.
MARY ASHFORD, GRANDMOTHERS COTTAGE near Chester Road Corner at the Yenton.
(This stood just before a row of cottages where Yenton Court Stands today)
4.
MARY ASHFORD PIT, PENNS LANE 1901.
Photographed by the Sir Benjamin Stone fromthe Stone Collection... The Mary Ashford Pit at Penns Lane where Mary's body was found in 1817.
5.
PENNS LANE, ERDINGTON 1910.
The site of the Murder at Penns Lane near Orphanage Road as it was in 1910 just at the old Erdington/Sutton boundary.