A New York lawyer is attempting to revive an old way to settle disputes: trial by combat.
Richard Luthmann is accused of assisting his client’s fraud and has responded to the civil suit brought against him by requesting trial by combat.
He argues that trial by combat, a natural right under old Norman law, was never abolished in the state of New York and therefore he is entitled to exercise his right.
[Source]
Local lawyers may be wondering: what is the status of trial by combat in British Columbia?
When clients arrive seeking a speedy and definitive end to a dispute, might trial by combat be recommended?
It would save paper when compared to a summary trial and the risk of appeal is very small if the other side is mortally vanquished.
Counsel can tell their battle-inclined litigants that trial by combat has been outlawed in British Columbia.
Section 2 of British Columbia’s Law and Equity Act imported all criminal and civil laws of England as they existed on November 18, 1858 (except those which only applied to local circumstances).
This includes the "Criminal Court Procedures (Trial by Combat and Criminal Appeal) Repeal Act 1819" which extinguished the right to trial by combat.
That piece of legislation has an interesting history.
It arose in response to the 1817 case of Ashford v. Thornton.
Mr. Thornton was charged with the murder of Mary Ashford.
The two had attended the same dance and were seen leaving together.
Ms. Ashford was found deceased the follow day having been drowned.
Mr. Thornton stated that he had left Ms. Ashford at 4:00a.m. and had not seen her since.
The case attracted significant media attention and popular interest, with most people believing the accused was guilty.
After a short trial, Mr. Thornton was acquitted after witnesses stated they saw him after 4:00a.m in a different part of the city from where the body was discovered.
The deceased’s brother (Mr. Ashford), unhappy with the result, lodged an appeal (making it a civil appeal as was possible at that time).
Mr. Thornton responded by requesting trial by battle.
Battle could be avoided if the Court found that there was overwhelming evidence against Mr. Thornton; however, the witness-supported alibi meant the judges were unwilling to make that ruling.
After entering his plea of “not guilty” and pledging to defend it with his body,  Mr. Thornton put on a single gauntlet and threw the other at the feet of Mr. Ashford thus inviting him to meet his challenge in battle.
After an exchange of applications on the validity of this legal maneuver (during which, presumably, the gauntlet remained on the floor) the Court ruled that Mr. Ashford could either allow for Mr. Thornton’s release or meet him in battle as the right to trial by battle had never been extinguished by statute.
The brother declined to engage in the combat and the appeal was dismissed, allowing Mr. Thornton to go free.
In response to this unusual defence, and the fear that it may be used by other, the Act removing the right to trial by combat was passed quickly, with all three readings of the bill occurring within a single day.
Meanwhile Mr. Thornton, faced with an angry mob and a sullied reputation, quickly left England and started a new life, coincidently, in New York City.
PBLI does not offer any combat courses, but we do have an outstanding selection of programs coming up.
Please see the Upcoming Programs section for more information.