JAN
MAR
Apr
16
2015
2016
2017
15 captures
22 Mar 14 - 25 Mar 16
Close Help
Jobs Motors Property Directory Family Notices Cashback Dating BuySell Book an Ad Photos
Login Register
My account
Logout
Facebook Twitter Newsletters
5 day forecast »
Brummies' Choice Awards Vote for your favourite venues
WOWBrum Your guide to the best of Birmingham
Most read
Live feeds
What's on
Sections Latest What's On Things to Do Family & Kids Theatre Film & TV Food & Drink Music & Nightlife Shopping Competitions
Top What's On
See inside Birmingham's newest Primark store before it opens tomorrow
Most Read in What's on
See inside Birmingham's newest Primark store before it opens today
Live: Huge crowds at grand opening of Primark at Fort Shopping Park
18 amazing things you never knew about Easter
Crufts winners 2016: Who were all the winners at Crufts this year?
Trending Today David Bowie Glynn Purnell Katie Price JRR Tolkien Carl Chinn
Popular this week Easter St Patrick's Day Brummies' Choice Awards Birmingham Mums
News
Sections Latest News Local News Midlands News UK News Homes and Property Politics Crime Education Nostalgia Showbiz Health Motors
Top News
Cerys Edwards: Driver Antonio Boparan could face new charge after death officially linked to crash
Most Read in News
Park, museum and attractions - the plan to transform a huge part of Birmingham city centre
Cerys Edwards: Driver Antonio Boparan could face new charge after death officially linked to crash
House prices rise six-fold on one Birmingham street: Find out how your property has risen
Live: Birmingham Smithfield plans for world-class family zone in the city centre
Tributes after teenager Amy McKenzie killed in Longbridge road crash
Trending Today The Queen Theresa May Kevin Doyle Richard Burden Beyonce
Popular this week Restaurant Reviews Alton Towers Father's Day
Sport
Sections Latest Sport Aston Villa Birmingham City West Brom Wolves Football Rugby Cricket Other Sport National Sport Sport Opinion Fantasy Football
Top Sport
Hendrik Almstadt's departure from Aston Villa: This is the first head on a stick - Mat Kendrick
Most Read in Sport
Ex Aston Villa midfielder URINATES in pint glass at Cheltenham Festival
Hendrik Almstadt's departure from Aston Villa: This is the first head on a stick - Mat Kendrick
Birmingham City star discusses Blues' role in in Republic of Ireland call-up
Aston Villa is dead last: How Randy Lerner's spirit-crushing reign is viewed across the pond
West Brom's Mr Motivator Jonny Evans sets two new targets beyond 40-point goal
Replay: Aston Villa: Live updates as Hendrik Almstadt's Villa Park departure is confirmed
Trending Today Samir Carruthers Hendrik Almstadt Tim Sherwood Gary Rowett Darren Moore
Popular this week Jack Grealish
Nostalgia
Celebs
Quizzes
In Your Area
A-B
Acocks Green
Aston and Nechells
Bartley Green and Weoley
Billesley and Hall Green
Birmingham City Centre
Bordesley Green and Small Heath
Bournville
Bromsgrove
Brownhills
C-I
Cannock
Castle Bromwich
Cotteridge
Digbeth
Dorridge
Dudley
Edgbaston
Erdington
Hagley
Halesowen
Handsworth and Soho
Harborne
J-Q
Kings Heath and Stirchley
Kings Norton and Brandwood
Kingstanding and Oscott
Ladywood
Lichfield
Longbridge, Rubery and Rednal
Moseley
Northfield
Perry Barr
Quinton
R-S
Redditch
Rugeley
Sandwell
Selly Oak
Shard End
Sheldon
Solihull
Sparkbrook
Stourbridge
Sutton Coldfield
T-Z
Tamworth
Walsall
Warley
Washwood Heath and Hodge Hill
West Bromwich
Wolverhampton
Yardley and Stechford
Trending St Patrick's Day 2016 Brummies' Choice Awards Win a Wedding Easter in Birmingham
Blues
Villa
West Brom
Wolves
Food & Drink
Home
News
Local News
From the Archives: Chilling similarities of the murders of two young women - 157 years apart
12:58, 28 Jan 2010
Updated
10:09, 24 Oct 2012
By Birmingham Mail
WHEN the semi-naked body of pretty Barbara Forrest was found dumped in picturesque parkland more than 35 years ago, it sent shockwaves around Birmingham.
  Shares
Get daily news by email
Invalid e-mail
Subscribe
Thanks for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later
WHEN the semi-naked body of pretty Barbara Forrest was found dumped in picturesque parkland more than 35 years ago, it sent shockwaves around Birmingham.
But amateur sleuths uncovered a series of bizarre coincidences with another murder of a young woman Mary Ashford more than a century and half earlier suggesting history had a chilling habit of repeating itself in the most brutal fashion.
The murder of 20-year-old Barbara Forrest on May Bank Holiday Monday the child-care worker had been out with her boyfriend visiting pubs in Handsworth and Birmingham city centre.
As the evening drew to a close he had walked her to a bus stop in Colmore Circus before making his way across the city to catch his own bus home to Moseley.
He was the last known person to see the child nurse and Lutheran Church youth worker alive.
Days later on June 4, a man discovered her body on the edge of Pype Hayes park, just a few feet away from the busy Chester Road, buried beneath bracken in a shallow ditch.
The scene, about 500 yards from where she lived, was quickly cordoned off and a murder investigation was launched by one of the force’s most experienced detectives, Det Supt Mick Lenehan.
The news of the discovery turned the worst fears of her Northamptonshire family into reality.
Her German-born mother Margarete Forrest, said: “She was a wonderful girl. This is the sort of thing you hear of happening but never think it can happen to you.”
As the murder investigation continued, it was hampered by any sighting of her after her boyfriend had left her at the bus-stop.
None of the other passengers on the No 67 service remembered seeing her and detectives weren’t even sure she had caught the night bus.
While that suggested she had either been abducted or had been given a lift by someone she knew, there was also the theory that the killer had pounced on her after she stepped off the bus.
A reconstruction of Barbara’s last known movements was held with a policewoman, dressed in similar clothing to the victim, making the ten-minute walk from the Tyburn Road bus-stop to her home.
Posters printed by the Evening Mail were also placed in the area.
The criminal underworld was asked to assist and police informants were contacted in a bid to obtain any intelligence that might help identify her killer.
Warning other women to be on their guard, Det Supt Lenehan said: “We cannot ignore the fact that there is someone about who is capable of doing something like this.”
Eventually a witness came forward who had seen a blue car parked near where the body had been found - at a time when Barbara would have met her death.
More than 100 detectives were involved in the original Barbara Forrest investigation.
Eventually, a suspect was identified and interviewed by senior detectives.
Michael Thornton worked at the same children’s home as Barbara and was eventually charged with her murder.
Birmingham Crown Court heard that blood was found on his trousers and his mother had given his a false alibi.
But seven days into his trial Thornton was acquitted when Mr Justice Croom-Johnson directed the jury to return a not guilty, ruling the evidence against him was nothing more than circumstantial.
Amazingly, exactly 157 years earlier on Whit Monday in 1817, Birmingham witnessed the murder of Mary Ashford.
Coincidence? Yet the similarities didn’t end there.
Both deaths occurred on or in the hours after Whit Monday in the Erdington area. Both victims were unmarried and 20. Both had been left for dead. Both were returning from dances. Both were last seen alive on the 27th of May.
And a man was acquitted of Mary’s murder was named ... Thornton.
PRETTY Mary Ashford was probably considered the belle of the parish.
After a day at work, she and her friend Hannah Cox went to the highlight of their social year, the big dance at the Tyburn House Inn.
They are believed to have left at about midnight and walked back to Hannah’s house.
Hours later factory worker George Jackson was walking from Erdington to work as a wiremaker in Penn’s Mill, not far from what is now known as Pype Hayes Park.
Cutting across the grass he saw a puddle of blood that seemed to be trampled through the grass and marked by two pairs of feet, one large as a man’s, the other smaller that led towards a gravel pit.
Lying submerged in the dirty water was Mary Ashford.
An examination found the she had been sexually assaulted before being thrown into the pit where she drowned.
It was known that during the evening before, Mary had been in the company of 25-year-old farmer and builder Abraham Thornton, from Castle Bromwich, and a special constable was sworn in to arrest Thornton.
In an example of early forensics, a nail in his boot was said to have fitted the impressions made in the grass near the marl pit.
Thornton was soon in Warwick jail, where he had been held after several days in Birmingham.
In August that year, he was tried for murder. On the evidence presented, the jury returned a not guilty verdict, taking just six minutes to reach their verdict.
Supporters of the Ashford family set up a fund to bring Thornton to retrial – a move that saw the case make legal history. At the second hearing at the Old Bailey, the mob besieged the court house to hear Thornton issue a strange challenge that dated back to medieval times.
“I am not guilty,” he said, “and I will defend myself with my body.”
At this point, he threw down the gauntlet as proof he was prepared to fight for his honour. If he lost, he would be hanged. If he won the fight, he would be acquitted. He issued this challenge to his accuser, Mary’s brother William. Ashford refused to accept the challenge from Thornton and expressed his intention of counter pleading.
Thornton was again charged with the Ashford murder.
Again, he pleaded not guilty but this time Lord Chief Justice Ellenborough delivered the final judgement that the defendant be discharged.
But he was hounded from England. His first attempt to leave the country was thwarted when his fellow passengers discovered his identity and refused to sail with him. He later settled in New York, married, prospered and died.
As for Mary, she lies in Sutton Coldfield churchyard under a gravestone with the now illegible inscription: “As a warning to female virtue and a humble monument to female chastity this stone marks the grave of Mary Ashford who on the twentieth year of her age having incautiously repaired to a scene of amusement without proper protection was brutally murdered on 27th May 1817.”
birminghammail
Recently Published
Birmingham magistrates
CASES dealt with at Birmingham Magistrates Court on February 16 included: Patrick Francis William Regan, 35, of Thames Tower, Nechells, obstructing a police officer in his duty and being drunk and disorderly, 12-month conditional discharge and ordered to pay £135 costs; Robert Allison Christopher, 33, of Regis Heath Road, Rowley Regis, being concerned in the production of 21 cannabis plants, 150-hour unpad work order and ordered to pay costs of £145; Satnam Singh Dhami, 47, of Blewitt Close, Castle Bromwich, theft of whisky and flowers worth £86.95, one-year conditional discharge, ordered to pay compensation plus £80 costs; Patrick William Riley, 23, of Library Way, Rubery, criminal damage to television and mirror totalling £950, assault by beating, 12-month community order, ordered to pay compensation of £100 to victim plus £60 costs; Christian Kyril Attard, 21, of Faraday Avenue, Quinton, driving while disqualified and without insurance, 150-hour unpaid work order, banned from holding a licence for a further 12 months and ordered to pay £85 costs; Simon Craig Edwards, 31, of Overbury Road, Northfield, theft of property from Lloyds Pharmacy worth £19, jailed for 18 weeks; Archie Albert Biggs, 30, of Francis Road, Yardley, drink driving, disqualified for three years and ordered to carry out 60 hours of unpaid work and pay £60 costs; Mohammed Manir, 28, of Showells Gardens, Nechells, common assault, 60-hour unpaid work order, ordered to pay £250 compensation to victim and £100 costs; Sonia Ethel Douglas, 46, of Constitution Hill, Handsworth, theft of four cans of Carlsberg Special Brew and four bottles of Bells whisky worth a total of £88 from Sainsbury, eight-week suspended prison sentence; Lisa Foxall, 23, of Wood Lane, Perry Barr, theft of Lynx deodorant and chocolates worth £37.62, jailed for 18 weeks; Joyson Paul John MacDonald, 39, of Princip Street, city centre, theft of duvet set worth £102.50 from House of Fraser, failure to surrender to bail, jailed for nine weeks; Adam Williams, 26, of Horseshoe Crescent, Great Barr, driving while disqualified and without insurance, fined £200 plus £15 costs and disqualified for a further 16 months; Alan John Stanley, 25, of York Road, Edgbaston, production of cannabis plants, conditional discharge and ordered to pay £85 costs.
Cars seized by police for forensic examination are stolen from Birmingham security compound
Decisions made at Birmingham Magistrates Court on February 15
Previous Articles
Birmingham school closures and changed openings - Wednesday, January 13 - 10.30am update
Details of school closures and schools with changed opening hours for Wednesday, January 13
Birmingham and Midland school closures: 8.20am
10pm update: School closures for Thursday January 7
Related Tags
In The News
Sailing
Moseley
Birmingham City Centre
Sutton Coldfield
Erdington
Handsworth and Soho
Castle Bromwich
Crime
Recommended in Local News
Birmingham Smithfield
Metro to Queen Elizabeth Hospital and Edgbaston cricket ground takes step closer with Birmingham Smithfield plans
Wolverhampton
Schoolboy, 11, suspended after classmate stabbed at Black Country school
Birmingham Smithfield
Opportunity for huge sports and music festivals on Wholesale Markets site
Birmingham Smithfield
New Birmingham city centre park revealed as part of Smithfield plans
West Midlands Ambulance Service
Teenager in hospital with head injuries following 3.15am crash in Stirchley
Cannon Hill Park
Thunderbirds creator Sylvia Anderson and real-life Miss Penelope dies, aged 88
UK News
Sylvia Anderson, voice of Thunderbirds' Lady Penelope, dies at 88
Most Read in News
Birmingham Smithfield
Park, museum and attractions - the plan to transform a huge part of Birmingham city centre
Harborne
House prices rise six-fold on one Birmingham street: Find out how your property has risen
West Midlands Police
Cerys Edwards: Driver Antonio Boparan could face new charge after death officially linked to crash
Birmingham Smithfield
Live: Birmingham Smithfield plans for world-class family zone in the city centre
West Midlands Police
Tributes after teenager Amy McKenzie killed in Longbridge road crash
Recommended on the Mail
Aston Villa FC
Brian Little is expected to play a part in Aston Villa's recruitment process next season
West Bromwich Albion FC
West Brom: The lowdown on Baggies defensive target - from the man who doesn't want to sell him
Birmingham Smithfield
Metro to Queen Elizabeth Hospital and Edgbaston cricket ground takes step closer with Birmingham Smithfield plans
Wolverhampton
Schoolboy, 11, suspended after classmate stabbed at Black Country school
Warwickshire
Table Tennis: Warwickshire Junior A failed to gain promotion
Birmingham Smithfield
Opportunity for huge sports and music festivals on Wholesale Markets site
Basketball
Basketball: City of Birmingham 89 Oxford Stealers 78
Erdington
Live: Huge crowds at grand opening of Primark at Fort Shopping Park
Car Reviews
First drive: BMW M4 Competition Package
Birmingham Smithfield
New Birmingham city centre park revealed as part of Smithfield plans
Birmingham Mail
Follow Us
Contact Us
Send A Story
Advertise
The Editor
Journalists
Facebook
Birmingham Mail
Birmingham City FC News
Aston Villa FC News
West Bromwich Albion F.C. News
Newsletter
Birmingham Mail Daily News
Twitter
@birminghammail
@BCFC_News
@AVFC_News
@bhamcommunities
Contact us
Got a story in your area?
Is there something happening in your area you would like us to report on?
Email
newsdesk@birminghammail.co.uk
Phone
0121 234 5000/5430
Postal Address
BPM Media (Midlands) Floor 6,
Fort Dunlop,
Fort Parkway,
Birmingham,
B24 9FF
Contacts
Newsdesk
0121 234 5536/5564
newsdesk@birminghammail.co.uk
Head of Web: Anna Jeys
0121 234 5280
Anna.Jeys@trinitymirror.com
Picturedesk
0121 234 5251
picturedesk@birminghammail.co.uk
Photosales: Patricia O'Gorman
0121 234 5450
photosales@birminghammail.co.uk
Competitions and promotions:
0121 234 5707
Work experience queries
workexperience@mrn.co.uk
Organised a special event?
Tell us about it and, if possible, send us a picture
Paul Fulford
0121 234 5214
paul.fulford@trinitymirror.com
Sell your story
Syndication Editor: Jayne Thomson
0121 234 5536/5564
Jayne_Thomson@mrn.co.uk
Send a story
Email
newsdesk@birminghammail.co.uk
Phone
0121 234 5000/5430
Postal Address
BPM Media (Midlands) Floor 6,
Fort Dunlop,
Fort Parkway,
Birmingham,
B24 9FF
Advertise with the Birmingham Mail
We reach over 2,871,244* unique users a month with dedicated coverage of Birmingham and the West Midlands.
Over 66% of our visitors, who view over 4m* page impressions every month, are in the desirable ABC1 socio-economic groups.
To book an advert with the Birmingham Mail team call 0121 234 5000, email charlotte.wallbank@trinitymirror.com or visit the Trinity Mirror Midlands website for more information.
The Birmingham Mail is part of Trinity Mirror Midlands , offering you unique access to our audience across the region online and in print.
*Source: Omniture (UK 6 month average August '14 - January '15)
The Editor
Marc Reeves
Editor, Birmingham Mail
Editor-in-Chief, Trinity Mirror Midlands
Email
marc.reeves@trinitymirror.com
Marc Reeves has edited the Birmingham Mail since December 2014.
Marc Reeves is the editor of the Birmingham Mail and the Birmingham Post, and has worked in regional media in the Midlands and across the UK for more than 30 years.
Journalists
Brian Dick
Birmingham City reporter
Gregg Evans
Aston Villa reporter
Bill Howell
West Bromwich Albion reporter
Paul Suart
Wolves reporter
Nick McCarthy
Crime Correspondent
Anuji Varma
Health Correspondent
Neil Elkes
Local Government Correspondent
Emma McKinney
Education Correspondent
Graham Young
Film writer
News
Local News
Midlands News
UK News
World News
Politics
Crime
Health
Showbiz
Motors
Nostalgia
Weird News
News Opinion
Sport
Aston Villa
Birmingham City
West Brom
Wolves
Football
Rugby
Cricket
Other Sport
National Sport
Sport Opinion
What's On
Arts & Culture
Comedy
Family & Kids
Film & TV
Food & Drink
Music & Nightlife
Competitions
Homes and Property
In Your Area
Birmingham City Centre
Bournville
Bromsgrove
Digbeth
Dudley
Kings Heath
Lichfield
Moseley
Solihull North
Solihull South
Sutton Coldfield
Tamworth
Walsall
West Bromwich
Wolverhampton
View All Locations
Buy, Sell & Tell
Jobs
Motors
Find a garage
Property
Business Directory
Family Notices
Mail Cashback
Dating
BuySell
Reader Offers
Book an Ad
Buy a Photo
Travel
Public Notices
Useful Links
Advertise with us
Contact Us
Subscriptions
Sell Your Story
Puzzles
Goal Time
About Us
Feedback
How to Complain
Corrections & Clarifications
Google Survey
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Bands Directory
Archive
View:
Desktop
Mobile
© Trinity Mirror Midlands