NOV
MAR
Apr
15
2008
2016
2017
9 captures
12 Sep 07 - 15 Mar 16
Close Help
Ward's Book of Days.
Pages of interesting anniversaries.
What    happened on this day in history.
NOVEMBER 17th
On    this day in history in 1817, the last challenge to    trial by battle took place.
The challenge of trial by battle was the extraordinary denouement of the legal    case of Ashford versus Thornton.
The outcome of the case was bizarre but the    facts were uncomplicated.
On the morning of May 27th 1817, Mary Ashford’s body was recovered    from a pond in a field near Erdingham, Warwickshire.
Murder was suspected, the    man in the frame being Abraham Thornton.
The previous night, Mary had attended    a dance at a local hostelry and had danced with Thornton, several times.
Thornton had been heard to boast that he had possessed Mary’s sister and would    have her too.
When questioned by the constabulary, Thornton admitted having sex with Mary but claimed it was with consent.
He was not believed and was    arraigned before Warwick Assize on a charge of murder.
At the trial, the prosecution argued that Thornton had molested Mary and    thrown her unconscious into the pool.
The defence produced witnesses saying    that Thornton was some distance away from the pool at the time that Mary was    last seen alive.
It took the jury no more than a few minutes to acquit the    defendant.
Mary’s brother William Ashford was enraged at the verdict.
He pronounced that    Thornton had bribed the defence witnesses and launched an appeal.
Appearing at    the King’s Bench, when asked to plead, Thornton cast down a leather glove    before his accuser and responded in melodramatic tones “ Not guilty and ready    to defend the same on body”.
Council for the defendant explained to the court    that Thornton was willing to undergo trial by battle, a fight with oak clubs,    with his accuser.
Council further went on to explain that this procedure was a    medieval usage and, although not used for centuries, had not been specifically    repealed by Parliament.
The prosecution countered that there was a principal    known as desuetude, which meant that a law ought to become invalid if it was    not used.
The court, after much deliberation, concluded that all law, once enacted,    remains law until it is repealed and only Parliament has the power to repeal    or change law.
Thornton was granted trial by battle but Ashford was but a    teenager and frail of body and could not engage in the battle.
Thornton    therefore won his case.
Upon this ruling, Parliament hastily reassembled and repealed the right to trial by battle.
Previous day
Next day
©2006 Ward’s Book of Days