Feb
MAR
Apr
15
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
15 Mar 16 - 15 Mar 16
Close Help
Skip to main content
User menu
Login
E-newsletter Sign up
Subscribe
Search
Sort by
Order
Opinion
Features
Procedure & practice
In court
Legal aid focus
Insurance surgery
Current issue
Contact
CPD
You are here
Home
Law in 101 words
Date:
29 June 2012
Snippets from The Reduced Law Dictionary by Roderick Ramage
Prohibited degrees
A marriage between a person and that person’s adoptive child, adoptive parent, child, former adoptive child, former adoptive parent, grandparent, grandchild, parent, parent’s sibling, sibling, or sibling’s child is void.
A marriage to the child of a former spouse or civil partner, the former spouse or civil partner of a parent or grandparent, the grandchild of former spouse or civil partner is void, unless both parties have attained age 21 and the younger party has not at any time before attaining age 18 been a child of the family in relation to the other party.
Marriage Act 1949, s1, Sch 1.
Smell a nuisance
In Barr and others v Biffa Waste, CA (2012), residents in the vicinity of a waste tip issued proceedings against the operator for nuisance by smell.
The defence that the environmental legislation modified the common law rights in nuisance was rejected on appeal.
The common law right could be cut down only by an express or implied statutory authority to commit a nuisance.
A more offensive type of waste had been introduced.
Far from there being an express or implied authority, the present problem was not anticipated by the tipping permit, which did not authorise the new type of smell emission.
Trial by battle
On a private appeal against an acquittal for murder, in Ashford v Thornton (1818), Thornton, who was accused of murdering the appellant’s sister, claimed the right to trial by battle.
The appellant argued that the evidence against Thornton was overwhelming so he was ineligible for wage battle, but the court disagreed.
The appellant declined the offer of battle and Thornton was freed.
The Appeal of Murder etc Act 1819 abolished various appeals and enacted by s2 “nor shall issue be joined nor trial be had by battle in any writ of right; any law, custom, or usage to the contrary notwithstanding.”
Verbal and oral
To say “verbally” instead of “orally” is policespeak, which does not encourage lawyers to be clear what they mean.
Year 1 students starting contract in term 1, class 2 (class 1 is offer, acceptance etc) learn that contacts are made by conduct or verbally, and, if verbally, in writing or orally.
They are then exposed to police practices and remember the police “verbals” and forget their contract law.
“Verb” means the part of speech that denotes action, but “verbal” keeps to its Latin origin (verbum meaning a word).
Its use to mean oral leads to uncertainty in legal documents and speech.
Ancient lights
By the Prescription Act 1832 s3, the right to light to a dwelling house is absolute, if it has been enjoyed without interruption for 20 years, but by s4, even after 20 years’ enjoyment, it can be lost if there is a year’s interruption.
Section 2 of the Rights of Light Act 1959 enables the owner of the servant land in lieu of obstruction to register a notice accompanied by a certificate from the Upper Tribunal, which may be temporary or definitive.
Time runs from the original registration, even when accompanied by a temporary certificate: Bowring Services v Scottish Widows (1985).
Creating legal relations
For the purpose of establishing whether a contract exists, the parties’ intention to create legal relations is to be determined objectively and not by enquiring into their respective states of mind.
In Attrill & others v Dresdner Kleinwort & others (2012) QBD there was evidence that Dresdner’s announcement in August 2008, of a minimum bonus pool of €400m, was such an intention.
Therefore, the claimants were entitled to damages equal to the difference between the respective amounts of bonus paid under letters issued in December 2008, based on a reduced bonus pool, and the corresponding amount based on the August minimum.
E-infringement of copyright
In Dramatico and others v BskyB and others (2012), ChD, it was held that the three tests in s97A of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 had been satisfied and five of the six defendant ISPs agreed orders to block or impede access to Pirate Bay, which had infringed the claimant’s copyright.
The three tests were (i) the ISPs were service providers, (ii) Pirate Bay’s operators had used those services to infringe copyright and (iii) the defendants had actual knowledge of that use.
The finding did not breach Art 10 (freedom of expression) of the European Convention on Human Rights.
False imprisonment of prisoner
The Prison Officers’ Association called a strike on 29 August 2007.
The governor of Wealstun Prison issued an order that prisoners should remain in their cells throughout the day.
Mr Iqbal’s normal routine on that day would have included six hours out of his cell.
In POA v Iqbal (2009) the CA allowed the POA’s appeal against a finding of false imprisonment and an award to Mr Iqbal of damages of £5.
False imprisonment requires a direct causal link between the act and the imprisonment, but the immediate case was the governor’s order, not the prison officers’ decision to strike.
Roderick Ramage is a solicitor in private practice at www.law-office.co.uk
Printer-friendly version
Author:
Roderick Ramage
Issue:
7520
Categories:
Blogs
Type:
Blogs
Newsletter sign up
Keep up to date with our fortnightly newsletter.
Register now.
Subscribe
Get our weekly magazine delivered to your door.
Plus a personal CPD service and unlimited access to an online archive of articles.
Criminal Law & Justice
Every week expert contributors provide comment on key issues covering all aspects of criminal law.
In Court
Law digest
Law reports
Judicial line
Profession
Risk management
Training & education
Legal services
Technology
Expert Witness
Legal aid focus
Marketing
Insurance surgery
Procedure & Practice
Costs
Arbitration
ADR
CPR
E-disclosure
LexisPSL
Civil way
Judicial review
Practice areas
Employment
Personal injury
Property
Public
Family
Other practice areas
Commercial
Charities
LexisNexis, Quadrant House, The Quadrant, Brighton Road, Sutton, SM2 5AS.
nlj policy links
Terms and Conditions
Privacy Policy
Advertise with us
Submission guidelines
© New Law Journal.
All Rights Reserved
nlj external partner site links
Partner sites:
LexisNexis
Conferences and Training
Supplier Directory
Tolley's Tax Guides and Books
Health and Safety
The environmentalist