JAN
APR
JUL
17
2015
2016
2017
10 captures
5 Jul 15 - 19 Oct 16
Close Help
Skip to content
The Smart Set
The Smart Set
Ideas
Journeys
Interviews
Columns
Blog
Twitter
Facebook
Tony's Secret Cabinet
11/05/2008
Fire Hazard
The Ball of Burning Men.
By Tony Perrottet
It seemed like such a good idea at the time...
Medieval partygoers loved spectacles, and every decent feast would
contain pranks such as dwarves leaping out of giant pies, or jesters
climbing onto the dinner table and burying their heads into tubs of
custard. But one joke performance went tragically awry in 1394 Paris.
It was a wedding feast attended by the young French King Charles VI,
who was given to fits of madness, and his long-suffering queen, Isabel.
   Tony’s Social Pages
Oxford Graduation
Jackon’s Inauguration
Renaissance Art Reception
One of the groom’s friends, a known party animal from Normandy named Hugonin de Guisay, decided to entertain the ladies by dressing himself and five accomplices (including the loopy king himself) as “Wildmen,” or savages. In secret, they donned their inventive outfits: Each man wore a linen body-stocking coated in resin and covered with flax to look like hair. The king’s squire, Evan, who clearly had more common sense than his master, realized that the materials were highly flammable, and ordered that all the torches in the banquet hall be kept at the back; he also suggested that the king not join the chain linking the other five. Around midnight, the six wildmen burst into the ballroom with great cries and bounded about dancing with the guests to the hilarity of all. Nobody could tell who they were, and the king was free to flirt with the youngest and prettiest of the girls at the party, the Duchess of Berry. So eager were the guests to know the wildmen’s identities that the king’s brother, the none-too-bright Duke of Orleans, grabbed a candelabra and went up for a closer look.
Horrifically, the wildman burst into a ball of flames, followed immediately by the others linked in the chain. The shrieks of the victims were “dreadful,” reports the chronicler Sir John Froissart, and any knight who tried to help received third-degree burns on his hands from the incandescent heat. One wild man managed to break his chain, run to the nearby buttery and throw himself into the dishwashing tub, saving himself, “but he was withal some time very ill.” The Duchess of Berry protected the king by throwing the train of her dress over him. The other four burned like Roman candles until water was brought; two died on the spot, two after days of agony.
“Thus the feast of this marriage brake up in heaviness,” mourns Froissart. It became known thereafter as the bals des ardents, the Ball of the Burning Men. • 5 November 2008
SOURCE/FURTHER READING: Johnes, Thomas (trans.), Sir John Froissart’s Chronicles of England, France Spain and the Adjoining Countries, (London, 1806).
Tony Perrottet
Tony Perrottet’s book, Napoleon’s Privates: 2,500 Years of History Unzipped, is a literary version of a cabinet of curiosities (HarperCollins, 2008; napoleonsprivates.com ). He is also the author of Pagan Holiday: On the Trail of Ancient Roman Tourists and The Naked Olympics: The True Story of the Ancient Games.
Posted in Archive , Blog , Tony's Secret Cabinet
More to read...
The Versailles Boudoir
Strong women rulers have always suffered violent attacks on their sexuality. To the Romans, Cleopatra was the lascivious “harlot queen,” a woman “whom her own slaves […]
Dinner and a Show
Berlin in the 1920s boasted a string of theme restaurants that rank as the forgotten precursors of Disneyland and Las Vegas. The most popular was the colossal Haus Vaterland […]
Great Minds Drink Alike
If the Bacchanalia created a blueprint for our most depraved debauches, the ancients also bequeathed us its more elegant counterpart: the learned drinking party or symposium. Like the […]
Post navigation
Axis of Evil
Bewitched
Leave a Reply
Be the First to Comment!
Connect with:
Please insert the code above to comment
Manage Subscriptions ∨
None
Notify of new replies to this comment
Notify of new replies to all my comments
Notify of all new follow-up comments
 
Published & generously supported by:
Top Stories
Friends of Dead Poets Society
By John Cotter
Larry Levis’ latest (and possibly last) posthumous collection
When In Rome
By The Smart Set Staff
Historian Mary Beard on her new book, old cultures, and whether we are doing as the Romans do
Minor Threat
By Kevin Egan
Higher education’s (post-)punk moment isn't the end.
Picking Pomegranates
By Bernd Brunner
The cultural history of the pomegranate, from ancient Greece to modern medicine.
The Aging Face
By Alyssa Pelish
On viewing my wrinkles through Proust, Rembrandt, and plastic surgery textbooks
Get our newsletter
Email Address
About Us
Advertise
Contact Us
Submissions
Features
Blog
The Smart Set is an online magazine covering culture and ideas, arts and science, global and national affairs- everything from literature to shopping, medicine to sports, philosophy to food. The Smart Set strives to present big ideas on the small, the not-so small, and the everyday.
More About Us »
The Smart Set is published and supported by the Pennoni Honors College at Drexel University.
Learn More About PHC »
Features
Blog
About Us
Contact Us