Mar
APR
May
17
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
17 Apr 16 - 17 Apr 16
Close Help
skip to main | skip to sidebar
Goblinbooks
Writing and reporting by Paul Bibeau
Wednesday, December 31, 2008
The History Behind Hop-Frog
(Note: Spoilers Ahead!
If you haven't read Poe's "Hop-Frog," drop what you're doing and plow through it now .
It's a short, deliciously nasty piece of work.)
Poe's classic revenge tale, "Hop-Frog" may have been inspired by the gruesome death of several nobles in 14th century France.
Here is the account from Paris Kiosque :
Be that as it may, in all likelihood the manor belonged to the royal family and was the site of the tragic scene of the Bal des Ardents, a fancy-dress ball held here on 28 January 1393.
The feeble-minded Charles VI and five of his friends turned up dressed as savages.
The Duc d'Orléans, purportedly curious to identify his brother the King, held a torch close to the faces of the `savages' and (accidentally?)
set their costumes aflame.
Four of the unfortunate party perished in the fire...
The King was saved by the presence of mind of his aunt, the Duchesse de Berry, who rolled him in her coat, yet, while he did not lose his life, he lost the last remnants of his sanity after this traumatic experience.
Barbara Tuchman's book on the period, A Distant Mirror: the Calamitous 14th Century, describes the costumes as being made of linen cloth sewn onto the bodies of the partygoers, and "soaked in resinous wax or pitch to hold a covering of frazzled hemp, so that they appeared shaggy & hairy from head to foot."
Needless to say, when one of them touched a flame, "stop, drop, and roll" probably didn't cut it.
In Edgar Allan Poe: A Critical Biography, Arthur H. Quinn points out that the story of a jester's vengeance was nowhere to be found in the historical account.
However, the horror of the tale isn't just the terrible death.
It's the specific form of cruelty the king inflicts on the jester, which sets the revenge in motion:
He knew that Hop-Frog was not fond of wine, for it excited the poor cripple almost to madness; and madness is no comfortable feeling.
But the king loved his practical jokes, and took pleasure in forcing Hop-Frog to drink and (as the king called it) 'to be merry.'
The effect is not good:
"Ah!
ha!
ha!"
roared the latter, as the dwarf reluctantly drained the beaker.
—"See what a glass of good wine can do!
Why, your eyes are shining already!"
Poor fellow!
his large eyes gleamed, rather than shone; for the effect of wine on his excitable brain was not more powerful than instantaneous.
He placed the goblet nervously on the table, and looked round upon the company with a half—insane stare.
They all seemed highly amused at the success of the king's 'joke.'
This is a common Poe theme, and Quinn suggests something I find very interesting, and a little creepy:
Perhaps Poe's own reaction to those who urged him, against his will, to drink the one glass that took away his self-control, was the model for the behavior of the dwarf.
Think about it for a second.
You're an addict.
You're always a single drink away from an ugly and potentially lethal spiral.
And the people who help you to that glass?
The ones you hate and fear most, the ones who inspire you to write this murderous tale in which you kill them all off?
They're probably your friends.
UPDATE: I have found a wonderful movie version of this story featuring puppets and live actors, including an actor from "Twin Peaks" as the jester.
Watch Part 1 here .
And here are Parts 2 , 3 , and 4 .
Enjoy!
Posted by
Paul Bibeau at
9:06 AM
Email This BlogThis!
Share to Twitter Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest
Labels: Edgar Allan Poe , hop-frog
Reactions:
3 comments:
Chad Helder
December 31, 2008 at 6:01 PM
Thanks for the historical background.
Hop-Frog is one of the Poe stories that really captures my imagination because of the vivid and shocking imagery.
Rue Morgue also produces the same effect in me.
Hop-Frog is a very interesting character, and the effect of alcohol upon his mind is also reminiscent of the opening scene in Pym.
It's almost like Poe portrays alcohol in a bizarre and alien way--like it's closely associated with madness.
I definitely think there is a biographical connection with the portrayal of alcohol in Pym and Hop-Frog (at least from what I understand of Poe's unique intolerance for drink).
Reply Delete
Paul Bibeau
January 3, 2009 at 2:34 PM
I've never read Pym, but now I have to.
Thanks.
Reply Delete
Tim Jarrett
May 1, 2011 at 10:05 PM
Makes me want to go back and read the remembrances of Poe by his classmates again.
There was apparently a long, detailed article in the Virginia University Magazine or the Alumni Magazine (don't remember which) by one of his classmates, discussing his time as a student, in which his relationship with alcohol was discussed.
Reply Delete
Add comment
Load more...
Newer Post Older Post Home
Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom)
TRUMP TALES OF TERROR
Cover Image
"Donald Trump by Gage Skidmore 3" by Gage Skidmore.
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 via Wikimedia Commons .
Alterations by author.
Cookie Notice
I use Google Analytics.
Follow Me On Facebook
Twitter Feed
Tweets by @paulbibeau
Subscribe To Goblinbooks
Posts
Atom
Posts
Comments
Atom
Comments
Blogs I Read
Frankly Curious
Anniversary Post: Daffy Duck Is Born!
- I've gotten rather tired of doing anniversary posts.
So tomorrow, I'm going  to start doing at least some fake anniversary posts: things that didn't  happe...
Slacktivist
Sunday favorites - ‘You have heard that it was said, “An eye for an eye and a tooth for a  tooth.”
But I say to you, Do not resist an evildoer.
But if anyone strikes  you on th...
Latest from Crooks and Liars
Sunday Morning Bobblehead Thread - [image: Sunday Morning Bobblehead Thread]  *(Democratic presidential hopeful Bernie Sanders drops the mic on Ted Cruz  in response to the Tailgunner's nasty ...
skippy the bush kangaroo
on any sunday - health insurance premiums rising faster than wages  what the panama papers tell us   the national debt doesn't need fixing  does college football make money ...
...from a darker place | a safe spot for nightmares to breed
A Medical Experiment - Right, got to get something up here even though I’m pretty stymied in my  writing these days.
This is from quite a few years ago, when I was  obviously heavi...
Return To The Center
24/7 - Sometimes people laugh at me for taking pictures of some things.
.
They don’t see the blue going to the peach and the peach going to the orange and the orange...
Zombos' Closet of Horror Blog
Ghost Brothers Premiere: Magnolia Plantation - Premiering tonight on Destination America.
With the Syfy channel lessening  its focus on paranormal programming, Destination America seems determined  to bri...
Mock Ramblings
No Fate Save Repetition - Sandra glanced at the figure at the side of the road as her car hurtled by.
It looked like a young man, in plain clothes with a simple pack, with his  thumb...
Dreams of the Shining Horizon
Three New Guardian Cats Stories Up At MatthewKeville.com!
- Hey, all.
I know it’s been a while since I posted here.
As I warned would  happen, I’m spending most of my time over at matthewkeville.com.
In that  time, ...
PERRspectives
Libya and "Bad Language": Obama and Bush Reveal Their Worst Mistakes as President - In an understandably rare interview with Fox News on Sunday, Barack Obama spoke bluntly about the "worst mistake" of his presidency.
That error, as he had al..
.
Onyx Lynx
"Two Game Wardens, Seven Hunters, and a Pure-Bred Guernsey Cow" - Another gallimaufry for a Saturday when I should be cleaning up because house guest.
A digest (from Republic of T) of the various anti-LGBTQ laws enacted b..
.
Graphic Firing Table
The Khalsa shall rule!
- "In *a decision by the U.S. Army Thursday*, Capt. Simratpal Singh, a  decorated Sikh-American officer and combat veteran, has received a  long-term religio...
northierthanthou
The Fog of Hedges - For me, The Fog of War (2003) is absolutely the gift that keeps on giving.
I get more fascinated every … Continue reading →
Whatsoever is Lovely
Being Christlike - I recently listened to a two part podcast featuring a blogger that I  follow.
They talk about his becoming an atheist and I find so much that I  resonate wit...
The Vault of Horror
The Witch: Mining the Roots of American Horror for a Deliciously Disturbing Modern Masterpiece - Bless me Father, for I have sinned.
It has been 27 months since my last blog post.
Life has gotten quite busy  for ol' B-Sol, including writing gigs that pa...
Minor Heresies
A Review: Trump Tales of Terror - A Review: Trump Tales of Terror Movie monsters don’t scare me.
Jason,  Freddie Kruger, Dracula in all his forms, rubber lizards, whatever.
I’m a  scientist a..
.
Monkeyfister
It's Been Fun... - Well, It's been something like ten years, off and on.
I enjoyed doing this,  when I was doing this, but, as I wrote a few years back, I was hanging up  the...
Sarah, Proud and Tall
Birth Certificate Watch: Day 1566 - Why has Donald Trump not released his long form American birth certificate?
On April 15, 2011, I mentioned, in passing, that Trump was not eligible to  beco...
exileinfundyland | a "heretic" in Alabama
Everyone Who Promoted Doug Wilson’s “Gay Marriage is a Far More Serious  Problem Than Slavery” Article - Originally posted on R.L. Stollar //// Overturning Tables: Content warning: Homophobia, White Supremacy, Anti-Blackness, Slavery  Apologisms.
The following c..
.
The Pedantic Professor
Easter - It’s been over a year since I posted anything on this blog, so I figured  that Easter would be a good day to resurrect it, as it were.
It’s also  appropriate...
Sexual fantasies, desperation...
...cat-sitting... The Big Money is about these things.
And also love, loneliness, the Spider Demon at the end of Doom, and working at a fashion magazine.
It is true in the emotional, but not legally actionable sense.
Buy it on Kindle ...
...or Nook .