Vigils in Halifax, Canada mark 25th anniversary of Montreal Massacre
CLARE MELLOR STAFF REPORTER 
Published December 6, 2014 - 5:35pm 
Last Updated December 7, 2014 - 6:20pm
Hannah Deloughery spent the evening of her 25th birthday on Saturday at a vigil in Halifax marking the 25th anniversary of the Montreal Massacre.
“I guess it is just been something that has been important in my life … because it happened on the day I was born,” Deloughery said.
The Ottawa native, who attends Saint Mary’s University in Halifax, has rarely missed a year attending an annual vigil to remember the 14 women shot to death at Ecole Polytechnique.
On Saturday night, Deloughery walked several kilometres by herself through the pouring rain to an event at the Company House on Gottingen Street.
“My father was very active in the white ribbon campaign to end violence against women,” said Deloughery, the youngest of four sisters. “It has always been a part of my family and my life. … It has always been something that has been important to me, not just today, but to work to end violence against women and create a world that is safe for women.”
The driving rain forced organizers to cancel a walk along Gottingen Street preceding the event. However, women and men of all ages packed the Company House for the “not so silent vigil,” which included poetry, song, and speeches calling for an end to violence against women.
Lindsay Duncan took to the stage to recount the tragic events of Dec. 6, 1989, when Marc Lepine entered Ecole Polytechnique and killed 14 women. The day was later renamed the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women.
“He claimed he was fighting the feminists,” Duncan said. “In under 20 minutes, he murdered 14 women.”
She recounted the names of some women in this region who have been murdered or suffered violence at the hands of others, including Loretta Saunders, Paula Gallant and Rehtaeh Parsons.
“Tanya Brooks’s body was found not far from here, around the corner, and if we walked down there we would see where her body was found,” Duncan said. “Her murderer still goes uncharged and unknown.”
More than 15 organizations, including the Dalhousie Feminist Legal Association, Bryony House and the YWCA organized or supported Saturday’s event.
Activist Rhonda Doyle LeBlanc told the crowd that the work for better gun control to protect women also needs to continue.
“Given the abolition of the long-gun registry, and further weakening of controls by the current federal government, now we also need to worry about Bill C-42, which proposes to weaken controls on handguns and military weapons,” she said.
Two university social-work students took to the stage Saturday to announce that they are launching a postcard campaign calling for the federal government to hold an inquiry into the disproportionate number of murdered and missing aboriginal women in Canada.
Halifax MP Megan Leslie has been asked to deliver the postcards to Ottawa.
“I will deliver those with pride and with honour,” Leslie said later in an interview.
She said the idea of having a “not so silent” vigil is a good one.
“It’s us coming together and making some noise. There is singing, there is spoken word. Yes, we need to remember and, yes, we need to work toward ending violence against women, but also we need to be together … and to be in solidarity.”
Similar ceremonies happened around the country, with a large crowd gathering outside Ecole Polytechnique to remember the victims in Montreal.
Men and women wept as they laid white roses and other flowers next to the memorial plaques outside the university. There was also be a torchlight procession through the Notre-Dame-des-Neiges cemetery in Montreal.
Lepine’s 20-minute shooting rampage at the engineering school in 1989 sparked a national gun-control debate that rages until this day.
He also wounded 13 other people — nine women and four men — before taking his own life.
Lepine ranted during the carnage that feminists had ruined his life.
With The Canadian Press