Apr
MAY
Jun
18
2015
2016
2017
2 captures
21 Apr 16 - 18 May 16
Close Help
Skip to Main Content Area
Media & Publications
Professional Advisors
Contact Us
English
Français
Our Story
Why invest in women and girls?
Our approach
Our commitment to you
Our History
Financial info
Board of Directors
Career Opportunities
Our Work
Your Money at Work
Stop the violence
End poverty
Empower girls
Take Action
Ways to give
Subscribe to our e-newsletter
Top 20 Reasons to Take Action
25th Anniversary Keepsake
Downloads
Events
Event Calendar
Annual Breakfast
Host an Event
Move for GEN1
Shop for GEN1
Our supporters
Corporate Partners
Private Foundations
Volunteer Committees
Individual Donors
Advertising and Media Supporters
Grants
Girls' Fund resources
Economic Development resources
Violence Prevention resources
Grant guidelines
OUR BLOG
Home
Day 12: Remembering the École Polytechnique Massacre
December 6, 2015,  by Jessica Howard , 1 Comment
Armed with a rifle, a hunting knife and a hatred of feminists, Marc Lépine walked into Montreal’s École Polytechnique on December 6, 1989.
Lépine had a clear plan when he entered the engineering school that day.
He strode into a classroom and separated the male and female students, asking the men to leave.
He asked the women if they knew what was going on.
“I am fighting feminism,” he told them.
After one of the women tried to reason with Lépine, he started shooting.
The rampage continued for about 20 minutes, as Lépine walked around the building, continuing to single out and attack women.
Then he shot himself.
Lépine had a suicide note in his jacket pocket that blamed feminists for ruining his life.
The note included a list of 19 women he wanted to kill because they were feminists.
Why We Remember
It’s been 26 years since the École Polytechnique Massacre, a hate crime that shook Canada and the world.
The anniversary reminds us that, despite our many advances, we have yet to stop violence against women.
In 1991, the Canadian Government designated December 6 as the National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women .
It’s a day when Canadian flags fly at half-mast, candlelight vigils are held across Canada, and we stop to think about those 14 women.
But it’s also a day to think about gender-based violence in all its forms, and remember that there have been many more casualties since 1989.
It’s a day to remember that it’s not only the sensational, headline-grabbing attacks that matter.
We have to remain united against the sexual harassment, assault, domestic abuse, and sex trafficking that so often goes unnoticed, unreported, and unpunished.
Gender-based violence and harassment remains “pervasive” in Canada, reported a secret Status of Women Canada document that was made public in September.
“While rates of male-on-male violence have diminished over time,” the report says, “rates of violence against women have not, and reporting has not increased.”
The report also pointed out that Canada has no comprehensive national strategy to address violence against women, unlike countries including the U.K., Australia, and Ireland.
Women in marginalized groups—particularly Indigenous women—face an even higher risk of violence.
A recent Globe and Mail investigation found that Indigenous women in Canada are about 7 times more likely than non-Indigenous women to be targeted by serial killers.
But there are glimmers of hope on the horizon.
The federal government recently committed to an inquiry on missing and murdered Aboriginal women .
It has also pledged to work with advocates and experts on a federal action plan to address gender violence.
The government is also urging all Canadians to sign an online pledge to #EndViolence .
There are also actions we can all take to address violence against women.
We can get informed .
We can speak out .
We can create a culture of consent .
We can learn how to help victims and survivors .
We can raise our children to better understand healthy relationships .
So, on December 6, let’s remember the victims of the École Polytechnique massacre, and continue to light the way toward a brighter future for women and girls.
Geneviève Bergeron
Hélène Colgan
Nathalie Croteau
Barbara Daigneault
Anne-Marie Edward
Maud Haviernick
Barbara Klucznik Widajewicz
Maryse Laganière
Maryse Leclair
Anne-Marie Lemay
Sonia Pelletier
Michèle Richard
Annie St-Arneault
Annie Turcotte
Learn More
Day 11: Building a National Strategy on Sex Trafficking
Day 10: Learning to Love Gender Diversity
Day 9: Re-evaluating personal security with the Internet of things
Take Action
Join GEN1 .
Become a  monthly donor  and help us build the first generation free of violence against women.
Sign up for our e-newsletter  to have our latest stories and resources sent to your inbox.
Follow us on  Facebook  and  Twitter  to join a national conversation on gender equality.
Categories:
Jessica Howard
Violence against women
Send by email
Comments
Abuse in any form isn't love
Submitted by Danielle Gray  (not verified) on Mon, 2015-12-07 23:26.
Don't let anyone tell you, your not wroth it.
Don't let anyone hit you, hurt you with words or make you feel worthless.
You are worthy.
reply
Post new comment
Your name:
E-mail:
The content of this field is kept private and will not be shown publicly.
Homepage:
Subject:
Comment: *
Web page addresses and e-mail addresses turn into links automatically.
Lines and paragraphs break automatically.
More information about formatting options
By submitting this form, you accept the Mollom privacy policy .
SUBSCRIBE
Sign up to receive our blog posts in your email inbox:
CATEGORIES
Corporate (25 posts)
Empowering girls (104 posts)
Guest bloggers (76 posts)
How to (28 posts)
Human trafficking (26 posts)
Impact stories (20 posts)
Infographics (16 posts)
Posters (2 posts)
Sexual abuse (66 posts)
SHE Magazine (40 posts)
Violence against women (163 posts)
Weekly roundup (50 posts)
What the Hashtag (10 posts)
Women in media (73 posts)
Women’s poverty (49 posts)
BLOGGERS
Amber Minnings
(13 posts)
Amy Williams
(3 posts)
Anqi Shen
(21 posts)
Anuradha Dugal
(9 posts)
Bahar Shadpour
(21 posts)
Beth Malcolm
(4 posts)
Chanel Grenaway
(4 posts)
Children of the Street Society
(2 posts)
Diane Hill
(31 posts)
Jessica Howard
(19 posts)
Jill Andrew
(5 posts)
Keetha Mercer
(5 posts)
Michele Ellison
(4 posts)
Pamela Johnson
(3 posts)
Paulina Zelazny
(5 posts)
Samantha Cochrane
(3 posts)
Sandra Hawken
(6 posts)
Sarah Barker
(36 posts)
Sheherazade Hirji
(3 posts)
Vera Held
(4 posts)
RECENT POSTS
Making Waves: Ben’s Story
How to Talk to Your Teen About Healthy Relationships
The Big Question: What’s your dream for women and girls in Canada?
Edelman Gets Consent
Campaign Roundup: Supporting Survivors of Sexual Assault
Investing in the strength of women and the dreams of girls.
Learn more about us >
© CANADIAN WOMEN'S FOUNDATION    REGISTERED CHARITY #12985-5607-RR0001    HOMEPAGE    ACCESSIBILITY    SITEMAP    CONTACT     PRIVACY POLICY
SITE DESIGN BY AGENTS OF GOOD