DEC
MAY
Jun
18
2014
2016
2017
3 captures
30 Aug 14 - 18 May 16
Close Help
Skip to Navigation
Vancouver Rape Relief & Women's Shelter
Search this site:
Give/Get Help
Escape an Abusive Man
Help A Friend
Get Involved!
Women
Men
Support, Education and Action Group
Free Legal Clinic
Donate
Teach/Learn
Frontline Knowledge
FAQ
News Room
Statistics
Join Us!
Speaking Engagements
Recommended Reading List
Tell Us!
Shelter Movement
Citizenship
Custody and Access
Homophobia
Consiousness Raising
Income
On Women Only Space
Police Response
Racism
Safety
Divorce Law
Networks
Food Politics
Housing
Global Resistance
Violence Against Women
Incest
Prostitution and Trafficking
Rape
Sexual Harassment
Wife Assault and Battery
Capitalizing on Women's Work
Imperialism and Colonialism
Objectification of Women
Second Wave
Sexuality
Women's Unhealth
About Us
Herstory
Vancouver Rape Relief Society
Contact Us
Donate
Men Can Stop Violence Against Women
Economic Autonomy
For Women
For the Independent Women's Movement
Campaigns
Abolition of Prostitution
Better Police Response to Violence Against Women
Funding For Women's Groups
Guaranteed Livable Income
Photos
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
News
Contact
Browsing Global Resistance resource library
Statement regarding Dr. Janice Raymond speak at the Montreal Massacre Memorial
in Violence Against Women , Prostitution and Trafficking
ShareThis
Friday, November 22, 2013
Every year, since December 6th, 1989 when 14 female engineering students at École Polytechnique were massacred by a man who stated that he "hated feminists", Vancouver Rape Relief has been marking the day to memorialize the women he killed and to strengthen our fight to end male violence against women. We feature topics and speakers at the Vancouver Public Library based on what are the most pressing issues and what the public in Vancouver would find most educational.  In 2013, by far one of the most prominent debates is Canada's laws surrounding prostitution, which the Supreme Court of Canada is currently deciding.
Given that, we have invited one of the leading, internationally-recognized, advocates and scholars on that issue, Dr. Janice G. Raymond to speak about her extensive equality-seeking work on prostitution as a form of violence against women.
Dr. Raymond is a Professor Emerita of Women's Studies and Medical Ethics at the University of Massachusetts and the former executive director of the Coalition Against Trafficking in Women (CAT-W).  Her new book is entitled "Not a Choice, Not a Job: Exposing the Myths about Prostitution and the Global Sex Trade".  
Her expertise has been instrumental in campaigning to have prostitution recognized as a form of violence against women — a view shared by many equality-seeking women's groups across Canada.  Janice's research and advocacy helped define the UN Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons (Palermo Protocol).  She is an important and highly valued ally in the fight to end the prostitution and trafficking of women and girls worldwide and we are honoured to have her speaking at the Montreal Massacre Memorial.
Since the controversy in the past few days surrounding our decision to invite Dr. Janice Raymond, we have received many letters of appreciation and donations from around the world. We are encouraged and grateful for this support.
In Solidarity,
The collective of Vancouver Rape Relief and Women’s Shelter
Walk for Rape Relief
24 hour crisis line
(604) 872-8212
TDD (604) 877-0958
Follow us on Twitter!
Tweets by @VanRapeRelief
Make a difference in women's lives...including your own
Women Volunteers Needed! Call 604-872-8212 to register.
© 2010 Vancouver Rape Relief & Women's Shelter Home | Privacy | Site map | Members Only | Site built by Affinity Bridge