SEP
MAY
Jun
18
2013
2016
2017
8 captures
11 Dec 12 - 18 May 16
Close Help
Skip to Content
Latest:
Vancouver group faces complaint after walking to...
Recommendations loom for Trans Mountain pipeline expansion...
Josh Fox Finds 'No End to Human Innovation' in...
Thousands experience futuristic technology at Vancouver...
Santigold takes capitalism to a new level
What we're doing now to prepare for watering...
Car owners dish on Evo Car Share
The latest innovation for biodiversity protection : hope...
George Clooney’s take on Wall Street, Dheepan’s refugee act...
Our new climate denial is even more dangerous
Home
Follow us
Home
News
Opinion
City
Culture
Lifestyle
Travel
National
Special reports
Sort by:
1989 Montreal Massacre was an anti-feminist attack, period.
Bianca Pencz  
Dec 7th, 2012
Share on Facebook Share on Twitter
Facebook Like
Above image of École Polytechnique memorial from Wikimedia Commons , as well as the insets.
Women of Canada: you know the 1989 Montreal Massacre , the École Polytechnique shooting that killed 14 women and injured 14 others? The tragedy this country memorialized all yesterday as the inspiration for our National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women ?
Well, stop being so self-absorbed. That had nothing to do with you, so you can shut it with all the “misogyny” and “gendercide” stuff.
That’s the basic message of Jonathan Kay’s National Post article on the issue, rather uniquely titled, “ For the 23rd anniversary of the École Polytechnique massacre, Amish lessons in mourning ”.
In his article, Kay ponders why the school shooting is remembered as a gesture of anti-feminist violence, viewing such treatment of the massacre as an insensitive politicization of an, in his opinion, apolitical event.
As he wrote in the Post, “I think Barbara Frum had it right when she asked, on CBC’s The Journal: ‘Why do we diminish [the act] by suggesting that it was an act against just one group?’”
Gee, might it have something to do with the perpetrator’s own admittance that he was “fighting feminism” , and the fact that he screamed "I hate feminists" before opening fire? Might it have to do with the suicide note he left behind, which condemned women as responsible for ruining his life?
Here's the event as Kay describes it: 
“Twenty-three years ago, on December 6, 1989, Marc Lépine walked into École Polytechnique and shot 28 people, killing 14 of them, and then himself.”
What Kay doesn't bother mentioning is that Lépine did not just kill 14 “people”. He specifically directed the fifty or so men in the classroom to leave, sparing their lives, because he saw worth only in theirs.
It is also a mystery why Kay believes that treating a misogynistic murder rampage as such is somehow “diminishing” of the tragedy. Could it be that violence against women is less important than violence against men, in his (and Barbara Frum’s) eyes?
The third-floor classroom where Marc Lépine began shooting.
Kay continued in his article:
Like other school shooters, [Marc] Lépine presented his motives to the world in a way that he imagined gave them some sort of larger political coherence. But the more obvious explanation is that — like Aurora, Co. movie-theatre shooter James Holmes, and many other mass shooters — Lépine was simply insane.
As with Holmes, the Dark Knight shooter, there likely was no larger social or political message at play — it was just a horrible tragedy that symbolizes nothing more than our inability to prevent bad things from happening to good people. That inability is frustrating and tragic. But it’s been part of the human condition forever, and will continue to be such forevermore.
1
2
Next ›
Last »
Read More:
Feminista
Commentary
1989 montreal massacre
Ã‰cole Polytechnique
femicide in canada
jonathan kay national post
marc lepine shooting
National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against Women
Share on Facebook Share on Twitter
Facebook Like
More in Feminista
What Once Upon a Time does for feminism *Spoiler alert*
Is Once Upon a Time's re-imagining of classic fairy-tale characters a feminist feat of modern TV?
Sarah Burke Dec 20th, 2013
Feminism and the weapon-wielding women of The Walking Dead: spoiler alert
Let's take a look at two of The Walking Dead's kick-ass female characters, Andrea and Michonne.
Sarah Burke Oct 12th, 2013
Sexy Halloween costumes are okay, now let's stop mocking them!
Halloween should be a time of year that you can dress however the hell you want, without any judgement
Sarah Burke Oct 9th, 2013
Speak up about this article on Facebook or Twitter . Do this by liking Vancouver Observer on Facebook or following us @Vanobserver on Twitter. We'd love to hear from you.
Related stories
New e-book on Enbridge Northern Gateway proposal shines light on pipeline controversy
Politics
Jenny Uechi
Missing women: Dave Pickton among 20 outstanding witness requests ignored since 2011
Politics
David P. Ball
Why isn't anyone talking about the misogyny involved in Amanda Todd's life and death?
Feminista
Krissy Darch
Enbridge's proposal to ship dangerous tar sands oil eastward puts communities at risk: activists
News
Anja Konjicanin
Canada’s gay and lesbian newspaper: poor job in representing L's in its name
Feminista
Erin Flegg
Government spent a hundred million to investigate Pickton
Commentary
David Eby
Neo-Nazi group's racist hate crimes condoned by public apathy and silence: police
Crime
David P. Ball
Canada ranked as worst performer in the developed world on climate change
Environment
Linda Solomon Wood
Sex workers call for hate crime law, end to violence
News
David P. Ball
Today on National Observer
McKenna won't give a straight answer about Enbridge pipeline
May 17th, 2016
Wildfire's return halts Fort McMurray oilsands industry recovery plans
May 17th, 2016
Alberta reviews Fort McMurray re-entry plan as flames spread north
May 17th, 2016
Catherine McKenna agrees with part of Michael Chong's climate policy
May 17th, 2016
Premier Christy Clark accused of inaction by climate advisory panel
May 17th, 2016
Does Trump have something against Indigenous people?
May 16th, 2016
Conservative Michael Chong proposes shift from Harper's environmental legacy
May 16th, 2016
Kinder Morgan Vancouver terminal surrounded by activists shouting 'Keep it in the ground!'
May 16th, 2016
Royal Dutch Shell deep sea pipeline spills in Gulf of Mexico
May 15th, 2016
Customers, especially millennials, driving changes to beef industry standards
May 15th, 2016
Shell: Skimmers in Gulf begin to clean 88,200 gallon spill
May 13th, 2016
Animal rights movement divided on ethics of farm liberations
May 13th, 2016
Trudeau announces EI benefits extended to three western regions
May 13th, 2016
Disaster-proof your homes say insurers, climate change is here
May 13th, 2016
CEO of Alberta's 76,000-member engineering association abruptly and mysteriously departs
May 13th, 2016
Andrew Weaver says Christy Clark made 'utterly bizarre' comments about global warming
May 13th, 2016
How the wolf became Alberta's scapegoat
May 13th, 2016
Canadians have yet to grasp 'amazing' work that saved Fort McMurray: Trudeau
May 13th, 2016
How the Fort McMurray climate change conversation went down in flames
May 12th, 2016
A tale of two communities in crisis: Fort McMurray and Attawapiskat
May 12th, 2016
Follow us
Stay Informed.
Subscribe to our free newsletter
Support Independent Journalism
Support VO
© Observer Media Group 2016
Blogs
Advertise
Contributors
Meet the team
Privacy
Contact
RSS
Sign in