Stockport's Bramall Hall to close its doors this weekend ahead of £1.6m makeover
18:00, 26 Sep 2014
Visitors can look round the Grade I listed Tudor manor house for free on Sunday before building work starts ahead of 18-month restoration
Shares
VIEW GALLERY
Bramall Hall is to close its doors this weekend as it prepares for a £1.6m restoration and refurbishment .
Visitors can visit the hall in Bramhall, Stockport , for free on Sunday from 1pm to 5pm before the builders move in.
The hall will then be closed until spring 2016 once all the work is completed.
The Grade I listed black-and-white Tudor manor house  is being refurbished thanks to a grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund.
The work includes repair of decorative features, windows and the Victorian Boiler House.
Two new themed rooms – a Victorian Breakfast Room and a Housekeepers’ Room/Butler’s Pantry – will be opened up to the public.
There will also be better facilities for visitors in the Stable Block – including new education rooms for schools, an improved café, shop, toilets and a free taster orientation space.
Landscape improvements to the walled garden will also be made.
Bramhall Park Café will close in December and re-open after an upgrade in September 2015.
Bramhall Park will remain open during this time.
The Drawing Room at Bramall Hall
Councillor Patrick McAuley, executive member for economic development and regeneration, said “Although the hall will unavoidably be closed whilst the work takes place, once completed it will greatly enhance the experience for visitors, improve facilities and provide better information and access.
"It will turn Bramall Hall into a prominent regional tourist attraction, bring visitors to Stockport and give local people an iconic heritage venue they can be proud of.”
On Sunday visitors will be able to view the plans and artist’s drawings as well as the historic rooms of the Tudor manor house.
Council staff will also be on hand to explain about the volunteering opportunities such as helping with gardening, choosing furniture for the hall and taking photographs.
There will also be the chance to find out about the many events and activities that people can sign up to during the course of the whole project.
These include nature tours, making medieval music, learning about Tudor and Victorian games, making historic embroidery and workshops on conservation and metalwork.
Coun McAuley added: “I would encourage people to come along to historic Bramall Hall.
“This is a great opportunity for people to see this iconic building that is right on their doorstep for one last time before it closes for repair.”
For further details of the project and of opportunities to become involved and volunteer visit stockport.gov.uk/bramall.