FEB
APR
May
9
2014
2016
2017
30 captures
10 Apr 06 - 25 Apr 16
Close Help
Go to homepage
the holiday and travel guide to the UK
Toggle navigation
Toggle search
Accommodation
Find Somewhere to Stay
Hotels, Inns, Guest Houses & B&B's
Accommodation near Airports
Holiday Cottages
Holiday Parks
Tourist Information
By Area
Visit England
Explore Wales
Discover Scotland
Enjoy London
Popular Attractions
Historic Houses in England
Castles in England
Castles in Wales
Castles in  Scotland
Gardens in England
Brochures
Holiday Brochures
Local Tourist Offices
Tourist Information Centres
Getting Around
Railway Stations
London Transport
Toggle search
Home
England Tourist Information
Historic Houses and Stately Homes in England
Greater Manchester
Bramall Hall
Bramall Hall
Bramhall Park
Bramhall
Stockport
Greater Manchester
Post Code : SK7 3NX
Telephone : 0161 485 3708
Admission Charge
Visit Their Website
Bramall Hall is a fine example of a Cheshire 'Black and White' timber-framed manor house.
Remodelling carried out in the late-19th century partially conceals the building's complex architectural history.  The oldest part of the house dates back to the late-14th century when John Davenport was lord of the manor.
The original building consisted of an open Hall with two cross wings.   Over the years there were many additions and adornments to the house, particularly in the 16th century when the Hall was floored over and the exterior walls were embellished with the intricate pattern of quatrefoils in squares.
In the late-18th century or early-19th century a second-floor long gallery was removed and the gatehouse range to the west demolished.  The house remained in the hands of the Davenport family until 1877 and in 1883 the local silk manufacturer, T.H. Neville, purchased the house for his son.  The house was extensively remodelled, restoring some of the picturesque charm lost by the alterations.  However, in the process much of the original texture was lost.
In the mid-20th century Bramall Hall was acquired by the Metropolitan Borough of Stockport.The house is approached from the west and from here the layout of the building can clearly be seen.  The service wing is to the left, the mainly Elizabethan hall range in the centre and the late-medieval chamber or solar wing to the right.
The gables adorning the hall range date from the late-19th century and are an imitation of nearby Little Moreton Hall.  Most of the brick chimneys and much of the woodwork were also replaced at this time.
When the Davenports left in 1877 the contents of the house were removed or sold.  Some of these pieces can now be seen at Capesthorne Hall in Cheshire.  The Davenport family have loaned back a number of family portraits to Bramall Hall but today the rooms have a rather bare appearance.
The most impressive interior is the late-15th century great chamber (now called the Ballroom) on the first floor of the south wing.  Here the original open timber roof has elaborately carved tie-beams and cusped wind-braces.  In the late-16th century the walls were decorated with a series of paintings depicting courtly and hunting scenes. These pictures, painted directly onto the wood, have recently been exposed and restored.
A large table carpet in the adjacent Plaster Room is the most important item in the house. The carpet dates from the 1560s (and repurchased in 1945) and depicts the coats of arms of Elizabeth I and the Davenports and their marriage alliances.
The room over the Hall, now known as the Withdrawing Room, was built for William Davenport.  The fine carving here dates from 1592 and there is a splendid plaster ceiling of the same date.  The walls are hung with Davenport family portraits.
Many other rooms in the house are furnished in late-Victorian style, with Arts and Crafts metalwork by George Faulkner Armitage and paintings by Herbert Schmalz.  The room over the restored private chapel in the south wing contains furniture made by A.W.N. Pugin for Abney Hall, in Cheshire.
Today Bramall Hall stands in a prosperous suburb south-east of Manchester. The house is surrounded by 70 acres of beautiful parkland which now form a municipal park.
Been here ? Add A Quick Review or Tip about Bramall Hall
Full Reviews
Latest Full Reviews
Add Your Full Review
No Full Reviews of Bramall Hall have been added yet, be the first !
 
Other Tourist Attractions Near Bramall Hall
Stockport War Memorial Art Gallery - Stockport (2.17 miles)
Stockport Town Hall - Stockport (2.23 miles)
Garrick Theatre - Stockport (2.37 miles)
The Museum of Hatting - Stockport (2.41 miles)
Stockport Plaza - Stockport (2.45 miles)
Stockport Air Raid Shelters - Stockport (2.53 miles)
Stockport Museum - Stockport (2.83 miles)
Fletcher Moss Botanical Gardens - Manchester (3.78 miles)
Adlington Hall - Macclesfield (3.79 miles)
Chadkirk Country Estate - Stockport (3.90 miles)
All distances are straight-line distances.
[ - ] How to get to Bramall Hall
Location Map of Bramall Hall
Nearest Railway Station
House Features
Interiors and park
Opening Times
Apr-Oct: Tues-Thur 13:00-17:00, Fri-Sat 13:00-16:00, Sun 13:00-17:00, open Bank Holiday Mon's 11:00-17:00 ; Nov-Mar: Sat-Sun 13:00-16:00, Bank Holidays 11:00-16:00, call for Christmas opening hours. Last entry 1 hour before close.
[ - ] Bramall Hall Photo
Hotels near Bramall Hall
Guest House Butterfly Guest House - Stockport
Alma Lodge Hotel - Stockport
Bed & Breakfast Henry's Bed and Breakfast - Stockport
Guest House Maple Lodge - Stockport
See More Accommodation near Bramall Hall
Featured Budget Hotel
Premier Inn Stockport South
Buxton Road, Heaviley, Stockport
More Details and Book Online
Self-Catering near Bramall Hall
Wizards Thatch Luxury Suite - Alderley Edge
Disley Hall - Disley Sleeps 6
Heatherways - New Mills Sleeps 5
Kitty's - Stockport Sleeps 6
More Self-Catering Holiday Cottages or Apartments near Bramall Hall
×
Get Our Newsletter
Sign Up
Get our emailed newsletter for UK travel and holiday news and ideas.
Follow @touruk_co_uk
Share This Page
Get our Newsletter
What to see and local attractions in Stockport
Stockport Tourist Information
Where to Stay in Stockport
Stockport  Hotels & B&B's
Stockport Holiday Cottages
Everything's Premier
but the Price
National Express Coaches
all over the UK
Sykes Holiday Cottages
 
About Us & Contacts
Advertising on tourUK.co.uk
Privacy and Cookies
Disclaimer
Some of Our Top Pages
Accommodation
UK Hotels, Inns, Guest Houses, B&B's
Greater Manchester Self Catering
UK Holiday Parks & Lodges
Tourist Information
England
London
Wales
Scotland
Get UK Tourist News
Sign up for our Newsletter
Subscribe!
Stay in touch with us
© Copyright  1997-2016 tourUK.co.uk