Sandford Heritage Award for Education
Disabled access
There is same-level access to the Museum via the front entrance and also a ramped entrance from the car park.
The ground floor has same-level access to all areas.
There are 24 stairs or a stair-lift to the first floor.
Wheelchair access to toilet facilities is possible on both floors.
Large print information is available upon request and touch tours are by appointment.
How to get to Bruce Castle Museum
Map Bruce Castle Museum and Park; click on the link in the external links section
Bicycle/On Foot
In line with our Green Visitor Charter we encourage you to come by bicycle or on foot to the museum.
You can secure your bicycle near the round Tudor tower to the front of the building.
Mainline Train
Bruce Grove Station (London Liverpool Street line).
On leaving the station walk up Bruce Grove (5 mins), the museum is directly ahead, located in Bruce Castle Park.
Or take the number 243 or number 123 bus from stop K on Bruce Grove to stop LE on Lordship Lane (Journey time approximately 2 mins).
Bruce Castle Museum is just across the road, located in Bruce Castle Park.
Underground
Victoria Line to Seven Sisters station (Zone 3).
At the top of the escalators exit the station by the steps to your left, round the back of the newspaper kiosk.
There will be a bus stop right in front of you at the top of the steps.
Take bus 243 along the High Road.
After about 5 minutes the bus will turn sharp left and travel up Bruce Grove.
At the top of Bruce Grove the automatic announcer will state, 'The Roundway East Arm'.
This is your stop.
Get off the bus and walk back a few yards to the crossing.
Take care as you cross Lordship Lane, and then enter Bruce Castle Park, just along to your right.
The museum will be facing you.
Or Piccadilly Line to Wood Green Station (Zone 3).
Upon exiting the station turn immediately to the left.
This road is Lordship Lane and Bruce Castle Museum is approximately 25mins walk.
Or take the number 243 bus from the first bus stop on your side of the road - it is about one minute's walk away (Journey time approximately 10 mins).
TFL Journey Planner website (external link)
Bus
Buses 243,123 and 318 all stop near Bruce Castle Museum.
See above for directions from the overground and underground stations.