Bruce Castle Museum
Lordship Lane, London N17 8NU
Get directions
Map Details
It looks like we don't have a specific address for Bruce Castle Museum, which makes giving directions tricky.
This business might not have an official storefront, or it might move to multiple locations throughout the day.
English (9)
Search reviews
Your trust is our top concern, so businesses can't pay to alter or remove their reviews.
Learn more.
×
Share review
23/6/2008
This is an excellent museum on many levels.
I like just wandering in their occasionally and poking around the different artifacts.
The history spans from Roman times up to the present day with excellent pictorial and recreative displays of the history of Haringey and Tottenham.
I've taken groups of kids here and they were facinated with the artifacts and information that was presented to them.
I like best that there is still an oral tradition in the community, many children had told me about it, of a lady ghost who leaps off the tower every halloween.
Stop following Ben W.
14/9/2012
Located close to Tottenham, the Bruce Castle Museum is an odd sort of place.
It has a feel of a small town museum, rather than one in the metropolis.
The old house, still grand despite historical modifications, is charming, whilst also in need of some TLC (which in this case might mean tonnes of lottery cash).
Inside the exhibitions are varied and interesting though perhaps a little worn around the edges.
It seems as if all the historic items of interest and value stored by Haringey Council have been dumped here, and arranged wherever possible into some sort of coherent order.
The variety is interesting, but means in truth there is a lack of quality exhibits in any one genre.
There are small exhibits on local sport, the history of the house (including ghost story), local life during World War Two, the growth of Tottenham, picture-filled corridors on the ground floor and a larger exhibition space upstairs.
The most interesting exhibit within the museum, and possibly the only one that would genuinely justify a visit is located on the ground floor.
Where the rest of the museum is a hotch-potch of items the exhibit relating to Broadwater Farm Estate is excellent.
Based on a university research project, the large exhibit looks closely into the building and development of the infamous housing estate associated with the 1980s riots.
It is fascinating how badly conceived the estate was in the first place, then how poorly built.
The levels of deprivation and crime, and the eventual riots are widely known, but what is excellently presented is the subsequent creation, development and success of a growing community unity.
The story of the Broadwater Farm Estate may be best known for the violence, but that would be wrong.
The colourful, dedicated and determined community leaders that brought the estate back from the brink are modern heroes, and their story deserves to be more widely known.
Generally I would find it hard to recommend the Bruce Castle Museum to anyone who had not yet exhausted London's larger and grander offerings.
But the permanent exhibition on the Broadwater Farm Estate is informative, thought-provoking and gives a sense of hope for the good nature of people, and a reminder of what communities can achieve when working together.
It would be fair to say the exhibit would benefit from an update, but for those with an interest in London's built and social evolution will find it fascinating and easily worth the visit.
Was this review …?
4/12/2008
First to Review
Bruce Castle is a Grade I listed 16th Century manor house in 20 acres of parkland.
I went to school a few streets away and we visited this small white castle a few times.
It is definitely well kept, and being as old as it is, it is full of history.
The main exhibitions were on the World Wars, it was almost like an Army museum.
This is a huge part of Tottenham Heritage, the one thing that stands, and in many ways, the Tottenham local should be very proud of it, Henry VIII actually funded certain parts of the building to be completed in his years as King.
Was this review …?