An Early illustration of Bruce Castle House
The 'Round Tower' Bruce Castle Museum and Park
Sir Rowland Hill's family ran a progressive school for boys at Bruce Castle during the Victorian period.
Sir Rowland reformed the British postal system and became famous for introducing the the Penny Post.
Bruce Castle opened as a Museum in 1906 and now houses the Borough of Haringey's local history collections and archives.
There are also two local groups who help further the work of the Museum and support local History projects in the Borough.
They are:
The Friends of Bruce Castle (FoBC)  who are a registered charity established to support Bruce Castle Museum and its services.
Anyone wishing to join the group should contact The membership Secretary, Friends of Bruce Castle, P.O Box 35958, London N17 8WA.
Haringey Local History Forum who are dedicated to preserve and enlarge its knowledge of Haringey and surrounding districts.
Should anyone be interested in becoming amember then please contact: The Secretary, Haringey Local history Forum.
P.O Box 25687, London N17.
6FW.
Sadly we are informed that the 'Local History Forum' has now been disbanded but some of their functions have been absorbed with those of the 'Tottenham Civic Society'.
Tottenham Civic Society.
The aims of the society are to educate the public in the geography, history, natural history and architecture of Tottenham.
Furthermore their objectives are to help secure the preservation, protection, development and improvement of features of historic, environmental or public interest in Tottenham.
Anyone wishing to join this group should apply to The Membership Secretary, Tottenham Civic Society, 61 Durban Road, Tottenham, London N17 8ED
We acknowledge the help and support provided by the Museum staff in the development of our 'Summerhill Road' website which has been invaluable.
The extensive information we have gathered about Summerhill Road and the surrounding area of Tottenham could not have been achieved without their help.
Note: If you wish to go on the Museum's mailing list then you can contact them as follows:
The Curator, Bruce Castle Museum, Lordship Lane, Tottenham, London N17 8NU.
Telephone 020 8808 8772 -   Website: www.Haringey.gov.uk