MAR
APR
May
15
2015
2016
2017
11 captures
16 Oct 15 - 15 Apr 16
Close Help
Bruce Castle Museum | Haringey Council
Skip to main content
Sign in to your account
Sign into your account
Register here
Search form
Search
Menu
Sign in
Services for residents
Pay, report, apply
Business information
Local democracy
Bruce Castle Museum
Wood Green Library will be closed on Sunday 17 April as work start starts to install customer service facilities. The library will reopen on Monday 18 April.
Opening hours
Easter closures
Wednesday to Sunday 1pm - 5pm
Visiting groups including schools may book to visit at other times
Planning your visit
Cost: free to all visitors
How to get here
Disabled access
Contact us
Tel 020 8808 8772
Email museum.services@haringey.gov.uk
Bruce Castle Museum, Lordship Lane, N17 8NU
What's On
A list of all current events taking place in the museum
Activities , exhibitions and talks
Courses , projects  and tours
Schools programme (PDF, 1MB)
Weddings
Plan your wedding in this Grade I listed building with 18th century rooms and 20 acres of parkland.
Wedding hire
Archive and Local History
Opening hours
What you can find
Loans, donations and bequests
Rooms for Hire
See our rooms and galleries for hire , including info on equipment and refreshments
Museum Collections
Collections - find out where you can search for objects relating to Haringey, which have been made available online.
Status and Awards
ACE Accreditation Scheme
Sandford Heritage Award for Education
Disabled access
There is same-level access to the Museum via the front entrance and also a ramped entrance from the car park. The ground floor has same-level access to all areas. There are 24 stairs or a stair-lift to the first floor.
Wheelchair access to toilet facilities is possible on both floors.
Large print information is available upon request and touch tours are by appointment.
Back to top
How to get to Bruce Castle Museum
Map Bruce Castle Museum and Park; click on the link in the external links section
Bicycle/On Foot
In line with our Green Visitor Charter we encourage you to come by bicycle or on foot to the museum. You can secure your bicycle near the round Tudor tower to the front of the building.
Mainline Train
Bruce Grove Station (London Liverpool Street line). On leaving the station walk up Bruce Grove (5 mins), the museum is directly ahead, located in Bruce Castle Park.
Or take the number 243 or number 123 bus from stop K on Bruce Grove to stop LE on Lordship Lane (Journey time approximately 2 mins). Bruce Castle Museum is just across the road, located in Bruce Castle Park.
National Rail website (external link)
Underground
Victoria Line to Seven Sisters station (Zone 3).
At the top of the escalators exit the station by the steps to your left, round the back of the newspaper kiosk. There will be a bus stop right in front of you at the top of the steps. Take bus 243 along the High Road. After about 5 minutes the bus will turn sharp left and travel up Bruce Grove. At the top of Bruce Grove the automatic announcer will state, 'The Roundway East Arm'. This is your stop. Get off the bus and walk back a few yards to the crossing. Take care as you cross Lordship Lane, and then enter Bruce Castle Park, just along to your right. The museum will be facing you.
Or Piccadilly Line to Wood Green Station (Zone 3).
Upon exiting the station turn immediately to the left. This road is Lordship Lane and Bruce Castle Museum is approximately 25mins walk. Or take the number 243 bus from the first bus stop on your side of the road - it is about one minute's walk away (Journey time approximately 10 mins).
TFL Journey Planner website (external link)
Bus
Buses 243,123 and 318 all stop near Bruce Castle Museum. See above for directions from the overground and underground stations.
TFL Journey Planner website (external link)
Car
To help plan your journey visit our Travel page.
Parking
There is a car-park to the rear of the museum, entrance is located on Church Lane (space for max 20 cars) - parking is free for visitors to the museum and archive service. Street parking nearby is only available on non-match days for Tottenham Hotspur FC.
Address: 
Lordship Lane
Tottenham
N17 6RT
Standard opening hours: 
Museum open Wednesday to Sunday 1pm - 5pm
Attached files
Filename
Filetype
Size
Publications list 2015
PDF
938.92 KB
Useful external links
Access to Archives
The Art Fund
Tottenham Downhills Shelter Tragedy 1940
Samuel South Potteries
The Friends of Tottenham Marshes
Map of Bruce Castle Museum and Park (from multimap.com)
Bruce Castle Park community excavation, 2006
Harringay MovieTone Film Archive
Haringey's Public Collection of Paintings (BBC)
War Memorials Archive
Page Last Updated:
22 March 2016
How can we improve this page?
Please let us know if this page helped you find what you were looking for by answering the question below – you can also leave a comment for us. Please keep your comments relevant to this page.
Please note: all comments about web pages are reviewed by us once a week. All service requests need to be sent to  Customer Services   directly.
Was this information useful? *
Yes
No
Tell us what you think of this page - please remember to leave your contact details if you would like a response:
Your comments (please leave your contact details if you would like a response)
By submitting this form, you accept the Mollom privacy policy .
Home
Libraries, Sport and Leisure
Culture and Entertainment
Visiting Haringey
Bruce Castle Museum
Room Hire
Opening Hours
What's On
Tottenham Cake
Weddings
Status and Awards
About Bruce Castle
Museum Collections
A to Z Directory of Haringey Council Services
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
Ways of keeping in touch with us
Contact us
For non-urgent queries you can use our online contact form.
Have your say
Help us make sure we’re achieving our aims and tell us what you think.
Mobile apps
Useful and convenient council services in the palm of your hand.
Email alerts
Get the weekly Haringey People Extra and other important information direct to your inbox.
Twitter
Get the latest important announcements as they happen.
Facebook
Be part of the Haringey community online as well as off.
Flickr
View images of happenings and events from our vibrant borough.
YouTube
See and hear about Haringey issues and news on our very own YouTube channel.
Translation services
About this site
Accessibility
Legal disclaimer
Terms and conditions
Privacy statement
This site is © Copyright Haringey Council Services