MAR
APR
May
15
2014
2016
2017
14 captures
28 Dec 08 - 15 Apr 16
Close Help
Passionate about British Heritage
Toggle navigation
Attractions
England
Scotland
Wales
London
History
England
Scotland
Wales
Accommodation
B&Bs
Historic Hotels
Self Catering
Home > England > London > Historic Houses > Bruce Castle Museum
Bruce Castle Museum
History, tourist information, and nearby accommodation
BY DAVID ROSS , EDITOR
Historic Connections
Nearby attractions
Accommodation
HERITAGE RATING:
  ?
Bruce Castle Museum
A 16th century manor house set in 20 acres of parkland. The manor is operated by Haringey Council as a local history museum, offering exhibits on social history, local landscape, and works by local artists.
History
The castle name refers to the Bruce family, who owned large parts of the manor of Tottenham from at least the 13th century.  When Robert Bruce became king of Scotland in 1306 he lost the family estates in England, including the Tottenham manor holdings.
Sometime in the 15th century a round tower of red brick was built, forming the oldest part of the house. The tower is 21 feet high and and extends deep under ground. Sometime in the 16th century - historians differ as to exactly when - a new house of brick was built, possibly by William Compton, Groom of the Stool to Henry VIII.
The earliest written record comes from 1516 when the king met with his sister Margaret Tudor, Queen of the Scots, at 'Maister Compton's House'. The house at this time was named Lordship House. The combination of house and tower are thought to be one of the earliest uses of brick for an English house.
The house passed to the 3rd Earl of Dorset, who fell into debt through his habit of extravagant gambling. He leased the house to Thomas Peniston, whose wife Martha was said to be the Earl's mistress! The house was eventually sold to Hugh Hare, 1st Baron Coleraine.
In 1667 Sir Hugh died after choking on a turkey bone, and the house passed to his son Henry.
Henry Hare, 2nd Baron Coleraine, renamed Lordship House as Bruce Castle, in honour of the ancient connection of the Tottenham estate with the Bruces of Scotland. In 1684 Hare remodelled the house, presumably with money obtained through his marriage with the Dowager Duchess of Somerset, leaving us with the striking belvedere and elegant south facade we see today.
The Resident Ghost
The Castle is said to be haunted by the ghost of Hare's first wife Constantia, who is said to have committed suicide when she learned that her husband was having an affair with the Duchess. Unfortunately for those who favour a good ghost story, the first mention of a spectral presence at the castle comes in 1858, 200 years after Constantia's death.
The 3rd Baron added a north range and James Townsend, Lord Mayor of London in 1772, remodelled the entrance front in typical Georgian style. James Townsend's wife Henrietta was a prodigious painter, and the museum has displays of her engravings of 18th century Tottemnham scenes.
The west wing was torn down in the early 19th century, leaving an oddly unbalanced look to the layout. The final changes came in 1870 when a three storey extension was added in Gothic Revival style.
The Hill School
By that time the castle was in use as a school, launched by Sir Rowland Hill, an active social and educational reformer, but a man best known for postal reform. Hill was headmaster of Bruce Castle School, based on the radical - for the time - idea that a teacher's role was no to impart facts and figure for students to memorise, but to foster a desire to learn. When Hill was appointed to head up the new General Post Office he left Bruce Castle School in the hands of his brother Arthur.
The Museum
The school closed in 1891, and Tottenham Council bought the estate. In 1892 the grounds were opened as the first public park in Tottenham. The house was opened as a museum 1906. The museum now covers the entire London Borough of Haringey, with a history of the area, archives, exhibits on the history of the Post Office and the life of Rowland Hill, and collections of early photos of the area. And of, course, since this is Tottenham, there is a section on the history of the Tottenham Hotspur Football Club. The social history of the area is brought to life, and there is a large collections of artwork depicting Tottenham through time.
The museum is free to enter. The closest underground stations are Wood Green or Seven Sisters then bus 243.
About Bruce Castle Museum
Address: Lordship Lane, Haringey, London, Greater London, England, N17 8NU
Attraction Type: Historic House
Location: At the junction with Bruce Grove (A10)
Website: Bruce Castle Museum
Email: museum.services@haringey.gov.uk
Phone: 020 8808 8772
Location     map
OS: TQ334 907
Photo Credit: Fin Fahey, licensed for reuse under the Creative Commons Licence
Nearest station:
Fairlop - 0.7 miles (straight line) - Zone: 5
HERITAGE
We've 'tagged' this attraction information to help you find related historic attractions and learn more about major time periods mentioned.
Find other attractions tagged with:
16th century (Time Period) -
NEARBY HISTORIC ATTRACTIONS
Heritage Rated from 1- 5 (low-exceptional) on historic interest
William Morris Gallery -                          4.1                         miles (Museum)
Eastbury Manor House -                          4.6                         miles (Historic Building)
Hill Hall -                          6.2                         miles (Historic House)
Sutton House -                          6.5                         miles (Historic House)
Copped Hall -                          6.6                         miles (Historic House)
Waltham Abbey Church -                          7                         miles (Historic Church)
Waltham Abbey Gatehouse and Bridge -                          7.1                         miles (Historic Building)
Thames Barrier - 7.4                         miles (Historic Building)
Nearest Accommodation to Bruce Castle Museum:
Self Catering   -   B&Bs/Guesthouses   -   Hotels
Nearest Self Catering Cottages
Willow, London -               5.1               miles
London, Greater London
Sleeps: 5
Stay from: £420.00 - 440.00
Elm, London -               5.1               miles
London, Greater London
Sleeps: 5
Stay from: £350.00 - 370.00
Oak, Waltham Abbey -               5.3               miles
Waltham Abbey, Essex
Sleeps: 2
Stay from: £332.00 - 770.00
  More             self catering near Bruce Castle Museum >>
Nearest Hotels
Menzies Prince Regent -               0.9               miles
Woodford Green, Greater London
Stay from: £49.50
St Georgio Hotel -               1.3               miles
Ilford, Greater London
Stay from: £42.00
Express by Holiday Inn  London  Newbury Park -               1.8               miles
Hillingdon, Greater London
Stay from: £68.00
    More Hotels near Bruce Castle Museum >>
Nearest Bed and Breakfasts
Aberdeen Guest House -                   2.7                  miles
Ilford, Greater London
From: £30.00
Amhurst Hotel -                   6.9                  miles
Stoke Newington, Greater London
From: £25.00
The Pilot Inn -                   7.4                  miles
Greenwich, Greater London
From: £50.00
  More             bed and breakfasts near Bruce Castle Museum >>
Attraction search
Find
in
Find
London
Attractions
All attractions
Attractions map
Castles
Family Attractions
Historic Churches
Historic Buildings
Landmarks & Monuments
Museums & Galleries
Parks and Gardens
Royal London
In Depth
Big Ben
British Museum
Buckingham Palace
Kew Gardens
Museum of London
Natural History Museum
National Gallery
St. Paul's Cathedral
Tower of London
Westminster Abbey
London Photo Gallery
History of London
Travel Resources
Tourist Info Centres
Travel links
Airport Parking
Gatwick
Heathrow
Car Rental
Gatwick
Heathrow
The London Pass
Getting Around
Underground
London Hotels
Budget Hotels
Mid Range
Luxury Hotels
Gatwick
Heathrow
Stansted
More Accommodation
Self Catering
Bed & Breakfast
London Pass
Free                entry to top London attractions
Including Tower of London, St. Paul's Cathedral, Windsor                Castle, London Zoo, London Dungeons,  theatre,                open-top buses... and a                lot more!
NOW - Save 6% off All London Pass purchases - just enter Voucher Code 6OFFLP when you buy your pass
The                London Pass
Most Popular London Hotels
Luxury
Montague on the Gardens
From £64.04
Historic
Tudor Lodge Hotel
From £59.00
Budget
Glendale Hyde Park Hotel
From £29.00
Gatwick
The George Hotel
From £39.00
Heathrow
Comfort Inn           - Heathrow
From £45.00
Passionate about British Heritage!
Connect
 
Britain Express is a labour of love by David Ross, an avid  historian, photographer, and 'Britain-ophile'. Connect with us on Facebook and (soon) Google Plus
Fun stuff
Heritage Traveller Blog
British History Quiz
Historic Attraction Quiz
Monarch Mayhem
This Day in British History
Useful stuff
Contact Us
Privacy
About Britain Express
TOP
‹ › ×
×
Previous
Next