Mar
APR
May
15
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
15 Apr 16 - 15 Apr 16
Close Help
The Anonymous Widower
Home
92 Clubs
Contact
About This Blog
Photos
Biography
Bruce Castle Park and Tottenham Cemetery
At this point in my walk, I met a very helpful Harringey Council official checking how many litter bins they’d lost and after asking the way I walked under the railway to Bruce Castle Park .
Sadly, the museum doesn’t open until one and I was too early.
As Sir Rowland Hill once owned the house, the museum also features a history of the Royal Mail.
I will return to see if there is anything my father printed.
It does have the archive of Wood Green Empire and my father certainly did their posters and programs in his works in Station Road, Wood Green.
It was a very surprising area, especially as you consider it was only a coiuple of hundred metres from the riots in the High Street.
52.245212 0.403362
Like this:
Like Loading...
Related
August 19, 2011 - Posted by AnonW | World | London , Museum , Printing , Riots , Tottenham , Wood Green
6 Comments »
My great grandparents on my father’s mother’s side are buried in Tottenham Cemetery.
He was German and she was half German and half Belgian.
He was a peaceful man I knew as a child who had suffered terribly through 2 world wars.
In the first he was rounded up and sent to Stobs camp near Hawick and then, after the war, they had to go to Germany to avoid anti-German feeling in England.
My grandmother of course stayed here.
They Then found themselves in the “wrong” country at the outbreak of the second world war.
They were found by the Salvation Army in Hamburg living in a bombed out building at the end of the war and brought back to England.
She died when I was 4 and he died about 4 years later.
I have cine film of him walking with us in Epping Forest in the ’50s.
As a child I never told anyone about my German connections as I became aware very early on that we didn’t mention it so close to the end of the war.
Comment by John Wright |  August 20, 2011 | Reply
The cemetery is in pretty good condition and it looks like it’s getting well cared for.
That area round Bruce Castle was quite surprising considering what has gone on lately.
Comment by AnonW |  August 20, 2011 | Reply
[…] sure where I’ll explore, but because it is so easy and fairly close, I think I might go to Bruce Castle Museum this afternoon.
52.245212 0.403362    Eco World Content From Across The Internet.
Featured on […]
Pingback by My Allergies and Me « The Anonymous Widower |  August 21, 2011 | Reply
[…] went to Bruce Castle Park again today to see the museum.
I took a few more pictures of staircases to go with the previous […]
Pingback by More Dangerous Staircases « The Anonymous Widower |  August 21, 2011 | Reply
Memories – I was born in the house shown on the corner of Tebworth Road (Leading to Nursery Street) – Thanks for the photographic memory.
Comment by Paul Przyszlak |  October 6, 2012 | Reply
Thanks for the compliment
Comment by AnonW |  October 6, 2012 | Reply
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
Notify me of new posts via email.
« Previous | Next »
About This Blog
What this blog will eventually be about I do not know.
But it will be about how I’m coping with the loss of my wife and son to cancer in recent years and how I manage with being a coeliac and recovering from a stroke.
It will be about travel, sport, engineering, food, art, computers, large projects and London, that are some of the passions that fill my life.
And hopefully, it will get rid of the lonely times, from which I still suffer.
Why Anonymous?
That’s how you feel at times.
Search for:
Charities
Liverpool University Pancreas Research
Macmillan Cancer Support
Miriam Hyman Memorial Trust
Useful Links
BBC
C – My Late Wife
Championship 2014-2015
Financial Times
Gluten Free Recipes
Ipswich Town FC
Lindsey Bareham
My INR Results
The Independent
The Telegraph
The Times
Twitter
UK-Coeliac Yahoo Group
Zopa
Top Posts
A Call From 08000562422
WordPress Admin
Register
Log in
Entries RSS
Comments RSS
WordPress.com
Email Subscription
Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Join 1,118 other followers
Archives
Archives
Categories
Categories
Advertising Architecture Art Athletics Banks BBC Building Buses Cambridge Cancer Charity Coeliac Construction Cricket Crime CrossRail CrossRail 2 Cycling Death Design Docklands Light Railway Driving Electrification Energy Engineering Entertainment Films Flying Football France Fraud Freight Germany Hackney Horse Racing Hotel Humour Internet IPEMU Ipswich Ipswich Town Italy Law Liverpool London London Overground London Underground Manchester Museum My House New Bus for London Olympics Phones Politics Recipe Religion Scotland Second World War Shopping Smoking Spam Stations Stroke Suffolk Tax Television The Netherlands Ticketing Trains Trams United States Waitrose Walking Weather Zopa
Tweets
A Part-Solution To The Level Crossing Problem?
anonw.com/2016/04/15/a-p… 17 minutes ago
A Small Cooking Spoon I Can Hang Up anonw.com/2016/04/15/a-s… https://t.co/AXPtkEl3kx 4 hours ago
Is The West Midlands Going To See A Boom In Rail Station Building?
anonw.com/2016/04/15/is-… 10 hours ago
Inaccurate Marks And Spencer Contactless Payments anonw.com/2016/04/15/ina… 11 hours ago
Farewell To BT Vision anonw.com/2016/04/14/far… 21 hours ago
Site info
The Anonymous Widower
The Andreas04 Theme .
Blog at WordPress.com.
Follow
Follow “The Anonymous Widower”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 1,118 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com
Post to
Cancel
%d bloggers like this: