The Life of Nelson
Author: Frederick Lloyd
An Accurate and Impartial Life of the Late Lord Viscount Nelson 1806
By Frederick Lloyd
Printed In Ormskirk By J. Fowler
The Volume is in Very Good Condition It has been rebound in later brown leather with the spine divided into six gilt-stamped compartments by five gilt band, with black morocco letter-pieces in the second and fourth compartments; externally the binding is relatively new, and largely free of wear and scuffing. Internally the leaves are generally clean and well margined, with the most notable damage being to the plate depicting Nelson’s boarding on the San Nicolas at the Battle of Cape St. Vincent, which has split along the fold with the outer portion lost, with the remaining plates in very good condition with only mild general foxing otherwise.
The Volume is CompleteAnd adorned with the frontispiece of Nelson and 9 other plates, including the often absent plate of Admiral Lord Collingwood. See below for pagination & dimensions
Of Lloyd’s Life of Nelson
Of Frederick Lloyd, little is known, save that he produced this work simultaneously to several other biographies of Lord Nelson in the immediate aftermath of the Admiral’s death. These include the infamous Harrison two volume set, which was vehemently criticized for the bias of Lady Hamilton, who dictated much of the content to Harrison in the hope of gaining a pension from Parliament. This Biography has held up better as a contemporary biography, though it is still tinged with the pride of a 
British subject in awe of one of the Empire’s greatest heroes.
Horatio Nelson was a small, sickly, fragile child born into a moderately prosperous Norfolk family but was enthralled by tales of the sea while roaming various local rivers. He joined the British Royal Navy through the influence of his uncle, Captain Maurice Suckling, (1726-1778), whom he first accompanied on an expedition to the Falkland Islands in the South Atlantic Ocean at age 12. He rose rapidly through the ranks and served with leading naval commanders of the period before obtaining his own ship’s command in 1778. He developed a reputation in the service through his personal valour and firm grasp of tactics but suffered periods of illness and unemployment among Britain’s downsizing of its massive worldwide military establishment after the end of the American War of Independence, (1775-1783). The outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars in 1793, following the explosive French Revolution beginning in 1789, allowed Nelson to return to service, where he was particularly active in the Mediterranean Sea. He fought in several minor engagements off the main French naval base at Toulon and was important in the capture of the island of Corsica and subsequent diplomatic duties with the various small Italian states. In 1797, he distinguished himself while in command of HMS Captain at the Battle of Cape St Vincent.
Shortly after the battle, Nelson took part in the Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife in the Azores Islands off Africa’s northeast coast, where his attack was defeated and he was badly wounded, losing his right arm, and was forced to return to England to recuperate. The following year, he won a decisive victory over the French Navy supply fleet supporting Napoleon’s first overseas campaign and invading army in Egypt, Palestine, and Syria at the Battle of the Nile at the Bay of Aboukir, off Alexandria, Egypt. Later, he remained in the Mediterranean to support the Kingdom of Naples in southern Italy against a French invasion. In 1801, he was dispatched to the Baltic and won another victory, this time over the Danes fleet in their capital’s harbor at the Battle of Copenhagen. He subsequently commanded the blockade of the French and Spanish fleets at their main naval base at Toulon and, after their escape during a covering storm, chased them across the Atlantic to the West Indies and back, but failed to bring them to battle. After a brief return to England, he took over the blockade at Cádiz on the Spanish coast in 1805. On 21 October 1805, the Franco-Spanish fleet came out of port, and Nelson’s fleet engaged them at the Battle of Trafalgar. The battle was Britain’s greatest naval victory, but during the action Nelson, aboard HMS Victory, was fatally wounded on the deck of his flagship H.M.S. Victory by a French sharpshooter perched in the overhead ships’ masts. His body was brought back to England where he was accorded a state funeral.
Nelson’s death at Trafalgar secured his position as one of Britain’s most heroic figures. The significance of the victory and his death during the pivotal battle led to his signal, “England expects that every man will do his duty”, being regularly quoted, paraphrased and referenced up to the modern day, along with his motto of “Palmam Qui Meruit Ferat”, Latin for “Let him who earns it, Bear the palm”. Numerous monuments, including the long-time iconic Nelson’s Column world landmark in Trafalgar Square, in central London, and the Nelson Monument in Scotland’s Edinburgh, have been created in his memory and his legacy remains highly influential in world military history and strategy and the historical culture of the later British Empire.
Pagination & Dimensions
The volume is paginated as follows: [iv], [1], 303, [1]. The volume measures about 20 cm. by 13 cm. by 3 cm. Each leaf measures about 190 mm. by 120 mm.
View this book on eBay
Full Gallery ( 50 images )
Mouse over the gallery and then use the scrollbar, your mouse wheel or your keyboard arrows to navigate. Click on an image to view in fullscreen mode.