Apr
MAY
Jun
23
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
23 May 16 - 23 May 16
Close Help
Study Resources
By School
By Subject
By Standardized Tests
By Book
Tutors
Get Homework Help
About Tutors
Become a Tutor
Flashcards
Find Flashcards
Create Flashcards
About Flashcards
Sharing
Upload Documents
Create Q&As
Log-in
Sign Up
Support
Get Free Access
Earn Money
St Pauls 12 South Transept
List of Terms
Flip Flashcards
Optimal Learn Optimal Learn will design a customized study program to help you master this flashcard set by a given deadline.
Take a Quiz
Save to dashboard
Edit these flashcards
{[ group.name ]}
Only Premier members can use this feature. Upgrade your membership to print this set.
Option 1: Large Terms on one side and Definitions on other side of the page
Option 2: Large Terms and Definitions side by side on the same page
3" x 5" index card Index card size with Terms on one side and Definition on other side.
Fullscreen
Keyboard Shortcuts:
Previous
Next
F Flip card
Helpful | {[ getHelpfuls() ]}
Unhelpful | {[ getUnhelpfuls() ]}
Get Premier Features Premier flashcard features include:
Private flashcard sets
Unlimited image uploads
Private groups and stats
Printing flashcard sets
Show both sides
Terms
Definitions
When & where was Horatio Nelson born ?
1758   -   Norfolk  -  suffered from Seasickness
What relation was Nelson's mother to Sir Robert Walpole ?
Grandniece
What did Nelson do in 1800 in the North Pole ?
Pursued a polar bear, before being ordered to return to the ship.  On being questioned why, he replied that "I wished, Sir, to get the skin for my father.”
What happened to Nelson in the battle to conquer Santa Cruz de Tenerife ?
He lost his right arm
What happened to Nelson in the battle in Corsica ?
Lost the sight of his right eye
Where was Nelson shot & killed ?
On board the deck of HMS Victory at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805  -  By a French sharpshooter
What was known as  ‘The Nelson Touch’ ?
His battle plan  -   Nelson broke up his fleet into two sections  -  one attacked from the rear while the other smashed through the front, cutting the enemy line in half
What was Nelson's signal ?
"England expects that every man will do his duty" -  referenced up to the modern day  -  most famous signal in naval history
Who & where did Nelson marry ?
Frances "Fanny" Nisbet  -  1787
Who was Nelson introduced to during the negotiations for reinforcements in Naples ?
William Hamilton's new wife, Emma Hamilton  -  British ambassador to the kingdom
How was Nelson standing on the deck of HMS Victory when he was shot ?
In full view in his admiral’s uniform & decorations  -  like a sitting duck
What were nelson's last words ?
“Thank God I have done my duty”
How many British ships were at the Battle of Trafalgar ?
27 British ships  -   defeated  33  French and Spanish  -  22  French and Spanish lost  -  all the British ships survived
What colour did Nelson order his ships to be painted ?
Yellow & black
Who sculpted the Nelson monument ?
John Flaxman    1808 - 1818
How can we see Nelson in his monument ?
In his peer’s robes,  with his left hand resting on an anchor which rests in turn on a coil of rope
What is Nelson standing on in his monument ?
On a large cylindrical plinth with a frieze of sea Gods
What can be seen on the right side of the plinth in Nelson's monument ?
A British lion crouches ferociously
What can be seen on the right side of the frieze in Nelson's monument ?
A sphinx   -   a reference to Nelson’s victory at the Battle of the Nile in 1798
What can be seen on the left of Nelson in his monument ?
Figure of Britannia, in helmet and Greek dress, points to the hero, drawing the attention of two young boys to him, and commending his example  -  boy is holding Sextant an optical instrument used in navigation
Who was Charles, Marquess Cornwallis ?
A British Army officer and colonial administrator
What is Cornwallis best remembered for in the American war of independent ?
1781  surrender of Yorktown,  Virginia  -  captured and exchanged for Henry Laurens
Beside America where else did Cornwallis serve ?
A civil and military governor in  Ireland & India  -  1801  -  Act of Union in Ireland
Where did Cornwallis die & buried ?
Gauspur  -  India
How is Cornwallis seen in his monument ?
He stands on a tall fluted plinth,  dressed as Knight of the Garter  -  sculptor John  Rossi
What can be seen in front of Cornwallis in his monument ?
A female figure grieving below
Who is seated on the left to Cornwallis monument ?
Britannia seated  -  Union Jack on her shield
What can be seen on the right side of Cornwallis in his monument ?
A male nude wearing beads with his head bowed solemnly
What is inscribed on the cylindrical plinth in Nelson's monument ?
Copenhagen  -  Nile  -  Trafalgar
How is Nelson immortalised in his monument ?
As a fearless leader looking to the horizon,  his face without emotion
Where can we see HMS Victory ?
Portsmouth Historic Dockyard   -   built in Chatham Dockyard
/ 31
Term:
Definition:
Definition:
Show Hide example sentence
Example Sentence:
Show Hide hint
Hint:
Flip Card
About these Flashcards
NO. OF TERMS
31
UPLOAD DATE
December 9th, 2015
SHARE
Report
For Teachers:
Help your students learn more effectively. Find out how
Study these flashcards on your mobile device.
View our list of apps
Leave a Comment ({[ getComments().length ]})
Comments ({[ getComments().length ]})
Submit Cancel
{[comment.username]} •
{[ comment.comment ]}
View All {[ getComments().length ]} Comments
Related Study Resources
Company
About Us Blog Sitemap
Get Course Hero
iOS Android Teachers
Careers
Our Team Jobs Internship
Help
Contact Us FAQ Feedback
Legal
Copyright Policy Honor Code Privacy Policy Terms of Use
Connect with Us
Facebook Twitter LinkedIn
Copyright © 2016. Course Hero, Inc.
Course Hero is not sponsored or endorsed by any college or university.
Ask a homework question
- tutors are online