I really do think that there are a lot of similarities between Warhol and MBW in some ways. For example, look at all of the controversy that the original soup can canvases stirred up when they were shown at the Ferus Gallery in L.A. An awful lot of people were insulted and offended that they should be expected to accept the work as being "art". Only 6 out of the original 32 canvases sold over a course of about three weeks for $100 each (Dennis Hopper bought the first one) and after this Andy Blum, the gallery owner, had the foresight to understand the importance of keeping the entire grouping together as a complete suite and approached the 6 individuals who had each bought one and convinced them to sell them back to him and he then worked out a deal with Andy to buy the complete suite of 32 canvases for $1000 which he was allowed to pay over the course of a year. Now they are priceless. I am not saying that MBW is Warhol but there are many aspects of what MBW is doing that remind me Warhol's path...
Getting ideas from other people...
Ted Carey:
"I said, 'John, Muriel [Latow] and I are having dinner tonight. Do you want to have dinner with us?' And he [Andy Warhol] said, 'No, I'm just too depressed.' So, I said, 'Maybe we'll come by afterwards.' ... So after dinner we went to Andy's, and he was very depressed... Andy said I've got to do something.' He said, 'the cartoon paintings... it's too late. I've got to do something that really will have a lot of impact that will be different enough from Lichtenstein and Rosenquist, that will be very personal, that won't look like I'm doing exactly what they're doing.' And he said, 'I don't know what to do.' So, he said, 'Muriel, you've got fabulous ideas. Can't you give me an idea?' And, so, Muriel said... 'you've got to find something that's recognizable to almost everybody. Something you see every day that everybody would recognize. Something like a can of Campbell's Soup.' So Andy said, 'oh that sounds fabulous.' So, the next day Andy went out to the supermarket - because we went by the next day - and we came in, and he had a case of... all the soups..."
Annoying other artists...
Irving Blum:
"The artists, who were very hostile... were provoked by these paintings... It was very peculiar. There was a lot of amusement. People felt that they were somehow slightly ridiculous. A gallery dealer up the road, I remember, did something that was very well publicized at the time. He bought dozens and dozens and dozens of cans of Campbell Soup cans at the supermarket, put them in his window, and said, 'Buy them cheaper here - 60 cents for three cans.' Or something like that. And so, there was a lot of hilarity regarding them. Not a great deal of serious interest... in fact, hardly any serious speculation. But a lot of carnival-like activity regarding the exhibition."
"In addition to "hilarity," the paintings provoked both intellectual and emotional responses from viewers."
I find it all very fascinating.  8)