Iconic Andy Warhol paintings 'disappear' after being loaned out by museum
15:51, 19 AUG 2015 UPDATED 16:50, 19 AUG 2015
BY KIRSTIE MCCRUM
Famous Campbell's soup can and Marilyn Monroe prints have been missing without a trace for five months
Two famous works of art by Andy Warhol have vanished while on loan from a modern art museum in Eastern Europe.
And the artworks, lost since March this year, have been called "irreplaceable" by the museum which loaned them out in the first place.
One of the artworks is the famed Campbell’s Soup Can and the other is one of his well-regarded Marilyn Monroe images.
The pop artist's paintings were loaned to an individual by the Andy Warhol Museum of the Modern Art in Medzilaborce, Slovakia, but he then vanished.
Warhol produced 32 Campbell's Soup Cans in 1962 to illustrate one of each of the canned soup varieties the company offered at the time.
The museum has kept the disappearance under wraps until now, but fear they will not get them back.
As a police investigation gets under way, it was confirmed that the museum director has been suspended over the irregularities that allowed the paintings to be released.
The museum said it been tricked into lending them to the administrator of a Bratislava-based company for "educational purposes".
They said that they had cooperated with the man in the past and had not had any problems but after the latest loan when they paintings were not returned, they had investigated and now fear they are lost forever.
Deputy manager of the museum Michal Bycko said: "The artworks which were loaned were collected by a security company with guns. They had all the relevant documents so there was no reason not to hand them over."
Government officials say the museum made a mistake because the paperwork they had signed and agreed to for the loan was not done with the man's company, called Arts Group, but instead had been loaned to him as a private individual.
The company is supposedly located at Jegeho street in Bratislava, but the address is deserted.
Veronika Fitzekova, spokesperson for the council in Presov which runs the museum, said the suspended manager had not been cooperating and it was difficult to find the contracts and documents dealing with the case without her help.
Slovak police but have been searching for the paintings but have so far come up with no clue as to the whereabouts of the artworks which they estimate would sell for six figures, but were nevertheless priceless because they were irreplaceable.
The Andy Warhol Museum of the Modern Art in town of Medzilaborce is the museum with the second largest collection of Warhol’s artworks worldwide after Pittsburg’s Warhol museum.
It contains 160 Warhol's artworks and many effects of his brother Paul and nephew James Warhola.
The Warhol museum is located in the north-eastern Slovakia, because Warhol's mother, Julia Warhola, was born and lived with her husband in the village of Miková that is 10 miles far from the town.