SEP
APR
May
19
2015
2016
2017
4 captures
2 Jul 14 - 19 Apr 16
Close Help
Skip to main content
The Ohio State University
Help
Buckeye Link
Map
Find People
Webmail
Search Ohio State
Department of History
More Sites
The Harvey Goldberg Center
eHistory
Origins
HTI
Monastic Matrix
CLIO
CHR
WGSH
Prohibition
MOCA
Origins
Current Events in Historical Perspective
Home
About
Back Issues
U.S. Politics
Constitution
Domestic Policy
Elections
Foreign Affairs
Society
Arts
Education
Women & Gender
Religion
Sports
International
Africa
Asia
Australia
Europe
The Americas
Middle East
Global Relations
U.S. & the World
War & Peace
Environment & Science
Environment
Food
Science
Technology
Economics
Viewpoints
Teacher Tools
Give
Search form
Search
Connecting History
Milestones
Hot off the Press
History Talk
November 2012: Andy Warhol’s Campbell’s Soup Cans, 1962
Printer Friendly Version
By Brenna Miller
In the 50 years since they first went on display, Andy Warhol’s 32 Campbell’s Soup Cans have become a canonical symbol of American Pop Art. Warhol, an American commercial illustrator from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania turned fine artist, author, publisher, painter, and film director, first showed the work on July 9, 1962 in the Ferus Gallery in Los Angeles, California. It was his first solo exhibition. The show was largely uneventful. Few people attended (not even Warhol), and afterwards a secondary showing planned for New York later that year was canceled.
Today though, Warhol has his own museum in Pittsburgh and his 32 Campbell’s Soup Cans is one of the prized pieces at the New York Museum of Modern Art. An earlier, single canvas version (Campbell’s Soup Can (Tomato) sold through Christie’s Auction house in 2010 for over $9 million.
32 Campbell’s Soup Cans consists of thirty-two 20”×16” screen-printed canvases, one for each of the varieties sold at the time. They were originally presented linearly, resting on a shelf mounted on the wall in an effort to mimic the grocery store shopping experience. For viewers today, the series tends to evoke nostalgia. Each print has slight variation due to the inconsistency of the silk-screening process and manual finishing details, and together, they appear “touchingly handmade.” In a world saturated with high-tech media marketing and airbrushed ads, it can be hard to imagine that in the 1960s, Warhol’s now ubiquitous art was criticized as sterile, cold, and mechanical.
At the time, Abstract Expressionism, featuring artists such as William de Kooning, Barnett Newman, and Mark Rothko, and privileging human emotion, painterly styles, and “fine art” aesthetics, was the movement to watch. Pop Art by contrast embraced mundane commercialism. Contemporary interpretations of Pop Art ranged from a subversive critique of American consumerism and a warning about the shrinking gap between human and machine, to a legitimation of the joy products bring to our lives.
Warhol himself once described Pop Art as “liking things.” When asked why he painted soup cans, he replied, “I used to drink it. I used to have the same lunch every day, for twenty years … the same thing over and over again.”
Like the commodities he drew inspiration from, Warhol fashioned himself as a commercial product. He worked out of a studio he called the “Factory,” employed an “assembly-line” technique, and his very persona seemed designed as a product for public consumption: plastic, image driven, devoid of a “narrative sense.” Thus, Warhol’s “true” personality, like his art, is hard to grasp. While divesting himself of individuality, he was also a master self-promoter, and, though billed as a prankster, he never gave up the act. Even his autobiographical 1975 “The Philosophy of Andy Warhol” is “a parody of personal revelation,” full of hollow banality, constantly reasserting the author’s own “nothingness.”
Nevertheless, Warhol’s presence in art and popular culture has been huge. Works like Green Coca-Cola Bottles (1962, above) and Brillo Boxes (1964) pushed the public to think about material consumption, while his reproductions of news articles depicting horrific car accidents and portraits of tragic celebrities such as Marilyn Monroe, Liz Taylor, and Elvis Presley made us think about our relationship to news and entertainment, and what that relationship said about us as a society. But however one might ultimately interpret Warhol, his work, or Pop Art in general, by the 1960s industrial production and commercialism were integral to the American way of life. And if art is a reflection of life, Pop Art filled a necessary gap, engaging the consumerist aspect that had increasingly come to characterize US culture.
- All images via Wikimedia Commons
Twitter
Facebook
Soundcloud
Tumblr
RSS Feed
Email alerts
History Talk
 
Out This Month
Policing the Police: A Civil Rights Story by Sarah Brady Siff
Coming Soon
All Politics is Local: Understanding Boko Haram                              by Kim Searcy
Featured Article
NATO's New Order: The Alliance After the Cold War
Read Article
Featured Book Review
State of War: The Political Economy of American Warfare, 1945-2011
by Paul A. C. Koistinen
Read Book Review
Origins: Current Events in Historical Perspective
207 Dulles Hall
230 West 17th Ave
Columbus, OH 43210
The Harvey Goldberg Center
Department of History
106 Dulles Hall
230 West 17th Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
Origins is published by The Ohio State University in collaboration with Miami University.
Copyright © 2016 The Ohio State University, College of Arts and Sciences
Privacy Policy
Log In
College of Arts and Sciences