— Robert J Somynne (@RobertJSomynne) January 20, 2016
Calls for an overhaul
Last year, Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn  called for an overhaul of the country’s national history curriculum to include more teaching about the crimes of the empire.
He also called for more teaching on the rise of the trade unions and “socialist tradition” in Britain.
On the subject of the British Empire, he said: “You need to get the story from the people where the empire expanded into, rather than those that came there to take control of it.”
But Corbyn is not the only one to take issue with Britain’s history curriculum.
Leading historians have called for an unvarnished approach to teaching about the country’s past.
Ashley Jackson, Professor of Imperial and Military History at King's College London,  told the Independent that, understandably, “a lot of British people would like to think that the imperial past was generally okay, but unfortunately if you look at the record of empire it’s very difficult to say that overall it was a good thing.”
Andrea Major, an associate professor in British colonial history at the University of Leeds said there was a “collective amnesia about the levels of violence, exploitation and racism involved in many aspects of imperialism” and that “better education” and “more open public debate” was needed.
The results of the YouGov poll were released last month  on the same day as a UN report into the violence committed by the Islamic State terror group in Iraq, which led to some uncomfortable comparisons on Twitter.
ISIS bastards.
Oops, Brits executing Indians in Singapore who refused to fight the Ottomans, 1914 pic.twitter.com/J3Tr6dJXIg
— Charles Edward Frith (@charlesfrith) January 20, 2016
Look over there!
Countries deal with traumatic histories and legacies in much the same way.
Let’s call it the “Look over there!”
approach.
The bad is downplayed to near irrelevance, while the good is magnified.
This is a kind of natural default displayed by great powers.
At the same time, the crimes committed by others take on a disproportionate level of importance.
A barely audible mumble of ‘yes we made some mistakes’ is quickly followed up with ‘but look at how awful [insert other country] is!’
A present day example can be found in Syria.
When bombs dropped by the US or UK kill civilians, it is denied or passed off as a terrible mistake.
No one bats much of an eyelid at the BBC or CNN.
But when Russian bombs kill civilians, they suddenly change their tunes and it becomes must-read news.
Look over there!
Look what they did!
To save myself from shouts of “hypocrisy” let’s be clear: This happens in Russian media, too.
'Imagine being in one of those buildings' hit by Russia.
@Bridget_Kendall , when did you ever say that when US, UK or Israel dropped bombs?