Empire: Total War General Discussion
Why does Great Britain get the best infantry, and the most infantry?
If this is your first visit, be sure to check out the FAQ by clicking the link above. You may have to register before you can post: click the register link above to proceed. To start viewing messages, select the forum that you want to visit from the selection below.
1,855
Re: Why does Great Britain get the best infantry, and the most infantry?
Oh, dear, oh dear. My willy is bigger than yours! And history is unfair, it shouldn't have been like that, because my willy is bigger than yours.
Boohoohoo
Yes, sometimes the "bad guys" win and they get to write history (in their language
Bastards
The losers might say the "bad guys" win all the time...
Anyway, shouldn't this thread be closed own it really has descended into silliness.
March 06, 2009, 03:41 AM #122
Re: Why does Great Britain get the best infantry, and the most infantry?
Originally Posted by Drakon
Haakon, you summerized the situation in one sentence. Yay!
Because they were not able to say "we want that little part of Europe there" like other big land army based countries, they searched for glory elsewhere, on the seas and in the colonies.
Drakon, what valuable resources were left in Europe? Apart from pride, the worlds wealth was elsewhere. As the Dutch found out in the 1500s-1700s and the British from 1780 to 1960 odd.
March 06, 2009, 03:42 AM #123
Re: Why does Great Britain get the best infantry, and the most infantry?
Originally Posted by gary
Do you think that it is a coinsidance that the british army have the best stats "No" Because look at your History, Britain only ever had a small standing army so this army had to be well trained and exceptionally disiplined in or to make up for their lack of numbers. The british cavalry were nutters, check out the pininsular wars. We only took about i think 18000 troops to partugal we trained the locals in how we british fight and... well the rest is history, The thing is when it comes to making war... "We brits take it very serious indeed" all volunteers in the 18th and 19th centurys. Rule Britania...... lol
No they really did not, becuase they had a navy that dominated the seas and won the wars for them.
How come you got owned by children and peasants in... america?
All historical units belong to us!
March 06, 2009, 03:46 AM #124
Re: Why does Great Britain get the best infantry, and the most infantry?
Originally Posted by sillyfrenchman
And before anyone thinks I'm some n00b, I've played, enjoyed, and worshiped every CA installment back to Shogun. They're the only reason I play RTS at all. Last week, you know which game I played the most? Medieval 2. Why? Because new mods breath new life into the game years after its release.
Without this ability, CA you are truly dead to me. You've taken away my single reason to play your games past the first month of its release.
It's okay sillyfrenchman, CA has said thiat ETW will be more moddable than M2tw, so just give it about 3 weeks before you jump to conclusions.
March 06, 2009, 03:46 AM #125
Re: Why does Great Britain get the best infantry, and the most infantry?
Originally Posted by Jihada
If it comes to that name one battle where the French didn;t use their allies..Germans,Italians,Dutch..even Prussians and Austrians in Russia.
Ah in Russia only? Cause elsewhere, in most Napoleons campaigns it was the french alone. By the way, why do you constantly ask me to find a battle in which the french blablabla. Answer my question first, and do not try to escape the reality like a bri...uhum I mean a snake:
When did the Brits won a war alone againt the french ?
Not 1700-1799, not even during the napoleonic period, since the beginning of times.
Answer for you: never. Sorry.
Originally Posted by Jihada
Apart from some useful help from the Portuguese..after they were British trained...all the battles in Spain were won by predominantly British.
The Grande Armée was in the east. Take that in account.
Originally Posted by Jihada
British tactics and training were superior, the French always came on in the same old attack columns while the British held a reverse slope..bang,bang..bayonet..French run off.
The british infantry was superior to the Grande Armée of Napoléon?
Interesting, and quite arrogant... considering that it took 7 coalitions of almost all European nations of that time to defeat the french army.
Originally Posted by Jihada
However, I must say in the earlier years the French army against Austria,Prussia and Russia was superb. Napoleon was such a fool to invade Russia and Spain and by the end the French had to rely on conscripts who fought well but from 1813 onwards there was no hope for France.
Agreed here. But well, we cant change history.
Ceci est une signature
Re: Why does Great Britain get the best infantry, and the most infantry?
Originally Posted by Sylver
Don't be dumb, Britain didn't even throw a quarter of her military might against America. Busy in Europe, and to top it all of King George didn't really give a
that some farmers were in a hubub and rebelling.
And don't accuse me of being nationalistic, I'm not British.
Never accused you for anything.
Still, it might not ahve been full power, but In america the forces was quite even, and still....
Maybe you could give an example of why Englands army really was the best? Like some battles or a Great War where you are outnumbered and surrounded and ........still pwn?
Re: Why does Great Britain get the best infantry, and the most infantry?
Originally Posted by Sylver
It's okay sillyfrenchman, CA has said thiat ETW will be more moddable than M2tw, so just give it about 3 weeks before you jump to conclusions.
I hope so. Why go to hexadecimal databases anyway? I mean, does reading a text file over a hex involve that much more resource usage? :hmmm:And why in god's name did they use STEAM? That thing has = sh-t since it was introduced with HL2. Use a registration database instead of Steam trash! Make ETW optionally available to people who like Steam (godforsaken as they are), but don't require it!
Oh well /rant
Re: Why does Great Britain get the best infantry, and the most infantry?
Originally Posted by Vowlesy
Drakon, what valuable resources were left in Europe? Apart from pride, the worlds wealth was elsewhere. As the Dutch found out in the 1500s-1700s and the British from 1780 to 1960 odd.
One word: agriculture
More food = more soldiers.
A reason why France, for instance, didnt see colonial empires as must-have during the ancient-régime: France was rich enough to sustain a big army without colonies. Our kings saw the colonies only are a bonus, and Napoléon didnt believe in them at all.
(they were all wrong)