You can't compare with the above items.
( Clear all items in the Compare list )
Crime in Georgia (country): People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country) (English)
(Paperback)
Publisher: Books LLC, Wiki Series
Rs.
1,319
82% positive feedback (5,666,197 ratings)
5 star
This item is Out of Stock!
Notify me when this product is in Stock:
Email:
Thank you, for your interest in Crime in Georgia (country): People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country) (English) (Paperback).
You will be Notified by Email when it becomes available.
Key Features of Crime in Georgia (country): People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country) (English)
Language: English
Author: books, llc|editorial
Publisher: Books LLC, Wiki Series
Crime in Georgia (country): People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country) (English) (Paperback)                          Price: Rs.
1,319
Please note that the content of this book primarily consists of articles available from Wikipedia or other free sources online.
Pages: 48.
Chapters: People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country), Thieves in law, War crimes in Georgia (country), 1907 Tiflis bank robbery, Ethnic cleansing of Georgians in Abkhazia, Kengir uprising, Sandro Girgvliani Murder Case, Thief in law, Ilia Chavchavadze, Russian Mafia, Sukhumi massacre, Ethnic cleansing of Georgians in South Ossetia, Vyacheslav Ivankov, Ahmed Djemal, Chechen mafia, Dagny Juel, Russian Bratva Structure, Human trafficking in Georgia, Kyrion II, Kamani massacre, Tariel Oniani, Guram Sharadze, William Horwood Stuart, Zakan Jugelia, Aslan Usoyan, Fenya, The Mark of Cain, Bitch Wars, Oleg Khinsagov, Garri Aiba, Evsei Agron, Otari Kvantrishvili, Giorgi Sanaia, Algeti Wolves, Zakhar Kalashov, Vladimir Podatev.
Excerpt: The 1907 Tiflis bank robbery, also known as the Yerevan Square expropriation, was an armed robbery by Bolshevik revolutionaries of a bank cash shipment in the Georgian city of Tiflis (now Georgia's capital, Tbilisi).
The robbery occurred on 26 June 1907 in Yerevan Square (now Freedom Square).
The bank stagecoach was attacked while transporting money between the Post Office and the Tiflis branch of the State Bank of the Russian Empire.
The robbers attacked the bank stagecoach and surrounding security forces using bombs and guns in the crowded city square resulting in the deaths of forty people and the injuring of fifty others, according to official archive documents.
The robbers escaped the attack with 341,000 rubles (estimated as US $3.4 million in 2008) from the robbery.
The robbery was planned and/or executed by many high-level Bolsheviks, including Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin, Maxim Litvinov, Leonid Krasin, Alexander Bogdanov, and Kamo, to fund their revolutionary activities.
The resulting bad press from this incident was later ...
Was this product information helpful?
Yes