Feb
MAR
Apr
13
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
13 Mar 16 - 13 Mar 16
Close Help
Connecting to your device
Please ensure network connectivity and stay logged in to the Flipkart App.
Notification sent
Try again if you don't receive the notification in 9 seconds Try again if you haven't received the notification yet.
Failed to connect
Either you don't have Flipkart App or not logged into it.
Login to the app and try again or Go back
 
Unlocking Great Deals!
Get the link via SMS
Enter One Time Password(OTP)
SMS sent to
Try again if you don't receive the SMS in 45 seconds. Try again if you didn't receive the SMS.
An OTP has been sent to you mobile ,please enter the same below to get the link.
Failed to send SMS to
Failed to verify OTP for
Failed to connect
We've received too many OTP generation requests from your device .
+91
Resend OTP in 60 seconds Resend OTP
We've sent a notification to your phone. Click here to resend. Click here to send yourself a notification. Get the app now or if you have the app, login to get a notification
Sell
Gift Card
Download App
24x7 Customer Care
Track Order
0
Signup
Login
Track your Order
Track using Order ID
Email
Enter Email ID used to place the order
Order ID
Login and do more!
Track individual Orders
View your entire Order history
Cancel individual Orders
Conveniently review products and sellers
Cart (0)
Digital Cart (0)
Cart 0
Electronics
Men
Women
Baby & Kids
Home & Furniture
Books & Media
Auto & Sports
Offers Zone
LOGIN
+91
change?
+91
show
resend?
show
forgot password?
New to Flipkart? SIGNUP
Recover your social account
SIGNUP
+91
change?
resend?
show
Already have an account? LOGIN
Manage Your Orders
Easily Track Orders, Create Returns
Make Informed Decisions
Get Relevant Alerts And Recommendations
Engage Socially
With Wishlists, Reviews, Ratings
Shortlist 0
Some error has occured while getting your complete shortlist. Retry
Use this space to shortlist the             products you like.             To add a product here,             simply click the icon.
Compare all
Remove all
Home
 > 
Books
 > 
Crime in Georgia (country): People murdered in G...
Add another Item
Add another Item
Add another Item
Add another Item
Compare Upto 4 products
You can't compare with the above items. ( Clear all items in the Compare list )
Crime in Georgia (country): People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country) (English)
(Paperback)
Paperback
Author: Source Wikipedia
Language: English
Length: 50 pages
Publisher: Books LLC, Wiki Series
Rs. 1,319
List Price
Sold by
WS Retail 4.2 / 5
82% positive feedback (5,666,197 ratings)
5 star
3,532,186
4 star
1,134,248
3 star
330,276
2 star
138,199
1 star
531,288
Positive
Neutral
Negative
?
Out of Stock!
This item is Out of Stock!
Notify me when this product is in Stock:
Email:
Thank you, for your interest in Crime in Georgia (country): People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country) (English) (Paperback).             You will be Notified by Email when it becomes available.
Key Features of Crime in Georgia (country): People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country) (English)
Language: English
Author: books, llc|editorial
Publisher: Books LLC, Wiki Series
Crime in Georgia (country): People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country) (English) (Paperback)                          Price: Rs. 1,319
Please note that the content of this book primarily consists of articles available from Wikipedia or other free sources online. Pages: 48. Chapters: People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country), Thieves in law, War crimes in Georgia (country), 1907 Tiflis bank robbery, Ethnic cleansing of Georgians in Abkhazia, Kengir uprising, Sandro Girgvliani Murder Case, Thief in law, Ilia Chavchavadze, Russian Mafia, Sukhumi massacre, Ethnic cleansing of Georgians in South Ossetia, Vyacheslav Ivankov, Ahmed Djemal, Chechen mafia, Dagny Juel, Russian Bratva Structure, Human trafficking in Georgia, Kyrion II, Kamani massacre, Tariel Oniani, Guram Sharadze, William Horwood Stuart, Zakan Jugelia, Aslan Usoyan, Fenya, The Mark of Cain, Bitch Wars, Oleg Khinsagov, Garri Aiba, Evsei Agron, Otari Kvantrishvili, Giorgi Sanaia, Algeti Wolves, Zakhar Kalashov, Vladimir Podatev. Excerpt: The 1907 Tiflis bank robbery, also known as the Yerevan Square expropriation, was an armed robbery by Bolshevik revolutionaries of a bank cash shipment in the Georgian city of Tiflis (now Georgia's capital, Tbilisi). The robbery occurred on 26 June 1907 in Yerevan Square (now Freedom Square). The bank stagecoach was attacked while transporting money between the Post Office and the Tiflis branch of the State Bank of the Russian Empire. The robbers attacked the bank stagecoach and surrounding security forces using bombs and guns in the crowded city square resulting in the deaths of forty people and the injuring of fifty others, according to official archive documents. The robbers escaped the attack with 341,000 rubles (estimated as US $3.4 million in 2008) from the robbery. The robbery was planned and/or executed by many high-level Bolsheviks, including Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin, Maxim Litvinov, Leonid Krasin, Alexander Bogdanov, and Kamo, to fund their revolutionary activities. The resulting bad press from this incident was later ...
Was this product information helpful?
Yes
No
Thanks for your vote!
Please write your feedback before submitting.
Skip
Table of Contents
The publisher of this book utilises modern printing technologies as well as photocopying processes for reprinting and preserving rare works of literature that are out-of-print or on the verge of becoming lost. This book is one such reprint.
Specifications of Crime in Georgia (country): People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country) (English) (Paperback)
Book Details
Publisher
Books LLC, Wiki Series
ISBN-10
1157810691
Number of Pages
50 Pages
Publication Year
2010
Language
English
ISBN-13
9781157810698
Binding
Paperback
Dimensions
Weight
109
Height
0.39
Width
7.44
Contributors
Author
Source Wikipedia
Was the product specification helpful?
Yes
No
Thanks for your vote!
Please write your feedback before submitting.
Skip
Please Note: All products sold on Flipkart are brand new and 100% genuine
Reviews of Crime in Georgia (country): People murdered in Georgia (country), Prisoners and detainees of Georgia (country), Terrorism in Georgia (country) (English) (Paperback)
Have you used this product?
Rate it now.
1
2
3
4
5
Be the first to write a Review
No reviews available.
 
Help Payments Saved Cards Shipping Cancellation & Returns FAQ Report Infringement
Flipkart Contact Us About Us Careers Flipkart Stories Press Slash N
Misc Online Shopping Affiliate Program Gift Card Flipkart First Subscription
Safe and Secure Shopping
All major credit and debit cards are accepted. We also accept payments by Internet Banking, Cash on Delivery and Equated Monthly Installments(EMI).
Track your
order
Free & easy
returns
Online
cancellations
Policies: Terms of use | Security | Privacy | Infringement © 2007-2016 Flipkart.com.
Keep in touch
PAYMENT METHOD
Loading ...
TOP