SEP
MAR
MAY
13
2015
2016
2017
7 captures
1 Jan 15 - 29 Oct 16
Close Help
Georgia About
Home
Welcome to ‘Georgia About’
Georgian Recipes
THE BEST OF GEORGIAN BUSINESS
About History – The Yerevan Square “expropriation”
Posted by Bassa's Blog on 19/10/2012 · 3 Comments
An audacious and bloody robbery, involving Joseph Stalin, took place in Tiflis (old name for Tbilisi) in 1907.
Organized by the Bolsheviks, it netted the equivalent of 4 million US dollars in today’s money.
In April 1907 leading Bolsheviks, including Lenin and Stalin, met in Berlin to discuss a robbery to obtain funds for their revolutionary activities.
It was decided that Stalin, who lived in the city of Tiflis in Georgia at the time, and an Armenian known as Kamo, should organize a bank robbery in Tiflis.
Information card on Joseph Stalin, from the files of the Tsarist secret police in St. Petersburg 1911
A worker at the Tiflis banking mail office, who was sympathetic to the Bolshevik cause, informed Stalin that a large shipment of money would be transferred to the Tiflis branch of the State Bank on 26 June 1907.
On the day of the robbery, the robbers, including Stalin and Kamo, met at Yerevan Square (present day Freedom Square) to wait for and ambush the stagecoach carrying the money.
At around 10:30 am.
the stagecoach entered the square and was attacked with grenades and bombs thrown by the robbers.
The money was snatched from the stagecoach and the robbers quickly scattered.
None were caught.
The scene of the robbery – Yerevan Square in Tiflis
The State Bank was not sure how much had been stolen but the best estimates were around 341,000 rubles, worth around 4 million US dollars today.
Around forty people were killed during the robbery and many injured.
The audacious and violent robbery made headlines throughout the world: “Rain of Bombs: Revolutionaries Hurl Destruction among Large Crowds of People” in the London Daily Mirror, “Tiflis Bomb Outrage” in The Times of London, “Catastrophe!”
in Le Temps in Paris, and “Bomb Kills Many; $170,000 Captured” in The New York Times.
Despite the success of the robbery and the large sum involved, the Bolsheviks could not use most of the large denomination bank notes because their serial numbers were known to the police.
Source: Wikipedia – 1907 Tiflis bank robbery
CLICK on the logo to visit GEORGIA ABOUT on Facebook and see photos and news about Georgia.
Click LIKE on the page and become a friend of GEORGIA ABOUT.
Share this:
Facebook
Twitter
Reddit
Pinterest
Google
LinkedIn
Tumblr
Print
Email
Pocket
Like this:
Like Loading...
Related
Filed under About History · Tagged with 1907 Tiflis Bank Robbery , Bank Robbery , Bolsheviks , Georgia , History , Joseph Stalin , Kamo , Tbilisi , The Yerevan Square "expropriation" , Tiflis
← About Food – Mtskheturi Gvezeli
About Sights – Khertvisi Fortress →
Comments
3 Responses to “About History – The Yerevan Square “expropriation””
cookinginsens
says:
19/10/2012 at 1:35 pm
Incredible!
Reply
colliesofthemeadow
says:
21/10/2012 at 5:24 pm
That Stalin was a very evil person….
the beginning of his long murderous career!
Reply
2browndawgs
says:
25/10/2012 at 4:06 am
Interesting.
Reply
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
Follow Georgia About on WordPress.com
SEARCH GEORGIA!
Search for:
Follow website via Email
Enter your email address to follow this website and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Join 38,617 other followers
Like us on Facebook
Like us on Facebook
‘Bassa’s World’ on Amazon
The enchanting story of a Caucasian Shepherd Dog and an Englishman living in Georgia
My Tweets
Top Posts & Pages
Popular Tags
Adjara Ajara Ajika Architecture Art Batumi Castles Cheese Chicken Dishes Chicken Recipes Churches in Georgia Contemporary Georgian architecture Contemporary Georgian Art Cooking Cooking Photography Eggplant Eggplant Dishes Eggplant Recipes Food Photography Georgia Georgian architecture Georgian Art Georgian Artists Georgian Castles Georgian cuisine Georgian Festivals Georgian Food Georgian History Georgian Literature Georgian Orthodox Church Georgian Salads Georgian Wine History Kakheti Khachapuri Kidney Bean Recipes Kutaisi Lobio Lobio Recipe Mestia Museums Museums in Georgia Mushroom Recipes Niko Pirosmani Old Photographs of Georgia Old Photographs of Tbilisi Old Photography Photography Recipes Republic of Georgia Salads Samegrelo-Zemo Svaneti Region Satsivi Svaneti Svanetian salt Tbilisi Tiflis Tourism Tourist Information Traditional Georgian Festivals Traditional Georgian Recipes Traditional Georgian Wine-Making Travel Tusheti Vegan Recipes Vegetarian Recipes Walnut Dishes Wine აჯიკა ბათუმი ლობიო ნიკო ფიროსმანი სვანური მარილი ქართული სამზარეულო ხაჭაპური
Click on picture to find out about Ananuri Fortress (Georgian: ანანური)
Click on picture to find out about Narikala Fortress (Georgian: ნარიყალა)
Click on picture to find out about The Bridge of Peace (Georgian: მშვიდობის ხიდი)
Click on picture to find out about skiing in Georgia
Click on picture to find out about Gelati monastic complex (Georgian: გელათის მონასტერი)
Click on picture for recipe for Imeretian khachapuri (Georgian: იმერული ხაჭაპური)
Click on picture to find out about Georgian dance (Georgian: ქართული ცეკვა)
Click on picture to find out about the Tbilisi Beer Festival
Click on picture to find out about the "Statue of Love" in Batumi
Click on picture to find out about Rabati Castle in Akhaltsikhe
Click on picture to find out about Georgia's internationally acclaimed Public Service Halls
Click on picture to find out about Vashlovani National Park (Georgian: ვაშლოვანის ეროვნული პარკი)
Click on picture to find out about the stunning architecture of the Tbilisi Prosecutor’s Office
Click on picture to find out about the National Botanical Garden of Georgia
Click on picture to find out about Gori Fortress
Kintrishi protected areas
Georgia About · The best of Georgia
Blog at WordPress.com.
The Structure Theme .
Follow
Follow “Georgia About”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 38,617 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.
%d bloggers like this: