Background

In order to train to become and to practise as a barrister, it is necessary to belong to one of the Inns of Court.  There are four Inns, Gray’s Inn, Lincoln’s Inn, Inner Temple and Middle Temple, whose origins date back to the 14th century.  The Inns are located in the same corner of London and provide collegiate activities and support for barristers and student barristers, including advocacy training, and the awarding of substantial scholarships to those entering the profession.  The actual buildings of Gray’s Inn are in London but those who become members join the Honourable Society of Gray’s Inn and can practise throughout the country.  The Inn is a not-for-profit society and its surplus income is passed to its related registered charities. 


Gray’s Inn has a large estate (approximately 14 acres) in Central London (WC1) which includes:

The Treasury, (housing the administrative offices and main meeting rooms).

A law library and lecture rooms.

A range of ‘house’ and dining facilities including a well-used dining hall supported by comprehensive catering arrangements.

A chapel.

Commercial premises (a large proportion of which are Barristers’ chambers).

Residential accommodation let on a commercial basis.

Extensive gardens which are open to the public at lunchtime.

The annual turnover of Gray’s Inn is over £10 million with most income being derived from rents but it also includes a catering turnover of around £1.5 million.  The Inn’s financial position is sound but its income is sensitive to the state of the property rental market.  The Inn is a not for profit Society and its net income is routed through its related registered charities.  The latest sets of accounts will be made available to shortlisted candidates.

Governance of the Inn 

The governing body of the Inn is Pension which consists of over 300 active members, known as Masters of the Bench or Benchers.  Benchers are either judges or senior barristers and are elected by Pension.  Pension is ultimately responsible for the affairs of the Inn.

The head of the Inn is the Treasurer, who holds this appointment for one year and each year Pension elects the Vice-Treasurer, who becomes Treasurer the following year.  The current Treasurer is Desmond Browne QC and the Vice-Treasurer is David Hunt QC, who will be Treasurer in 2016.

Pension also elects members of the Management Committee, each on a three year tenure.  The Treasurer is a member but never the Chairman of this Committee.  The full composition is as follows:   

9 Benchers, one of whom is elected Chairman
The Treasurer - ex officio
The Vice-Treasurer – ex officio
The Vice Chair of the Education Committee
The Inn’s Bencher trustee on the Board of the Council of the Inns of Court (COIC)
2 practising barristers who are not Benchers
In addition, the following members of staff attend Management Committee meetings:

The Under-Treasurer
Director of Finance
Director of Estates
Director of Education
The Librarian

The Management Committee meets approximately once a fortnight during the legal term and it manages the Inn’s affairs, subject to reference to Pension on major issues.  Pension meets nine times a year.  There are other committees, such as Education, Scholarships and Student Affairs.  In addition, a number of Benchers (most of whom are Members of the Management Committee) are appointed to fulfil particular roles.

Management Structure

As with all member-led bodies, the relationship between the members and the Under-Treasurer requires great tact and exceptionally good interpersonal skills to work effectively.  Whilst the job is essentially that of Chief Executive, with a number of other duties and responsibilities, for historical reasons the primary title of the appointment remains as the Under-Treasurer.  In basic terms, the Under-Treasurer reports to the Treasurer and the Management Committee who between them lead the activities of the Inn. 

The Under-Treasurer, through senior managers, is responsible for all the staff, although he/she should recognise that committee chairmen and certain Benchers have responsibilities and will have suggestions as to how to develop their areas.  Close liaison between the Under-Treasurer and chairmen and Benchers is therefore essential.  Any differences of opinion over a particular course of action would be resolved by the Management Committee.

There are approximately 55 staff organised as shown in Summary, Organisation Chart and Candidate Profile.