Gray’s Inn: the golden age
The Inns of Courts have gone through a lot of changes and building rehabilitations since their creation.
The Inns of the sixteenth century can be studied separately as their history prestige are considerably different.
The first documented site known to have been close to the site of the current Great Hall was the Manor House.
It was the residence of the De Gray family.
A large number of lawyers work here and formed the Honourable Society of Gray’s Inn.
However, none of the Inns has a proven year of their foundation, even though the records of Gray’s Inn do not start until 1569.
The oldest and most important connected series of records is the Pension Books of Gray’s Inn.
In order to be a part of this Inn around 1560, the admissions process was different from the rest.
The admission fee was 20d per each person in chamber.
The student should have completed a degree in law at Oxford, Cambridge, Staple or Barnard’s Inn (Inns of Chancery Lane).
Students were admitted as “inner ballisters”.
In a period of 6 to 9 years they were called to the Bar and proclaimed “utter ballister”.
After 10 years, they were already considered Ancients.
Gray’s Inn recruited mainly from the North, East Anglia and Kent; Lincoln’s Inn from East Anglia, Devon, Hampshire, Shropshire, Wiltshire and Wales.
In the sixteenth century there were many more legal societies or Inns than the four Inns of Court we know today.
Those with the most active educational programmes attracted the brighter and more ambitious students.
During this century there were more enrolled students (220 were counted in 1561) from Gray’s Inn than any other Inn of Court as well.
Elizabeth I was patron of this Inn, as all her secret service has formed by member of this Inn.
Queen Elizabeth made a prestigious centre of Law out of this Inn as well.
One of the most outstanding students at Gray’s in the Golden Age was certainly Francis Bacon.
He was Nicholas Bacon’s son, a commissioner that recruited students for the Inn.
Francis was accepted as a student in 1576 and became treasurer in 1608.
He expanded the library and created the Gardens, better known as “The Walks”.
His close relationship with Shakespeare and the letter from William Strachey (survivor of the Sea Venture on which apparently The Tempest was based) gave birth to the Baconian theory.
During the Golden Age, Grays Inn was the place to be.
It was not only a place to study law but a very popular place for masques and banquets and people who wanted to be instructed in Arts or be interested in readings.
One example of these masques was the “Grand Night of Entertainment for Strangers”.
It was on December 28, 1594.
William Shakespeare first appeared on stage with the first work in Grays Inn: “The Comedy of Erros”.
This work, the shortest play of Shakespeare, was performed in place of “The Templarians”.
“The Templarians” was a Sports company’s piece of theatre, regular actors in these kind of events at Gray’s Inn.
Unfortunately the lack of backstage for this big company forced them to quit and be substituted by the appearance of Shakespeare.
Shakespeare’s players took over Sports to perform “The Comedy of Errors”.
The heavy drinking and the big discontent that this swap had provoked ruined the party, and so the play.
That was the last time Shakespeare’s company would step on stage at Gray’s Inn.
However, Gray’s Inn would not stop competing with Middle Temple Inn for hosting the premieres of Shakespeare’s works.
The Great Hall of Gray’s Inn is one of two documented buildings which are still preserved and also have hosted premieres of Shakespeare’s performances.
Gray’s Inn is today situated on High Holborn at the City end.
Alejandro Otero
Sources
http://www.graysinn.info (Gray’s Inn website)
http://www.archive.org/details/gestgrayorum00grayuoft (Gesta Grayorum)
http://www.archive.org/details/pensionbookofgra01gray (Pension Book vol 1.)
http://www.archive.org/details/pensionbookofgra02gray (Pension Book vol 2.)
www.innertemplelibrary.org.uk/news/conference.doc (Inns in contexts)
Dr Clare Rider and Mrs. Celia Charlton
Fletcher, R.J. ed.
The Pension Book of Gray’s Inn http://www.innertemple.org.uk/archive/itad/index.asp