JAN
APR
May
15
2015
2016
2017
2 captures
31 Jan 15 - 15 Apr 16
Close Help
Skip to main content
Twitter
Facebook
LinkedIn
Search form
Search this site
Find Us
Contact
News
The Inn
Joining
Education
Members
Library
Chapel
Calendar
History
Gray's Inn
Home
Members
Masters of the Bench
Get Involved
Clubs and Societies
Court Pupillage - Judge Volunteer Form
Member Facilities
Lunch and Dining in Hall
Publications
Graya Archive
Graya News Archive
Masters of the Bench
Elections
Management Committee
Barristers' Committee
Pupillage Matched Funding Scheme
Seniors in Hall
Fellows
Inn's Rules and Standing Orders
Fundraising
Member Details and Membership Cards
Masters of the Bench
PDF version
The responsibility for the organization and running of the Inn is divided between the Masters of the Bench (also known as 'Benchers') in Pension and the Under Treasurer, its Chief Executive. Pension meets at least once per legal term.
Barrister members of the Inn are elected to the Bench in accordance with the procedures set out in Order 13 of the Inn’s Standing Orders . You can find full details regarding the election procedure for Masters of the Bench in part 1, section 4 of the Inn’s rules . The rules also contain further information regarding Bencher seniority (part 1, section 6) and dining by the Bench (part 1, section 7).
Current Benchers
The latest list of Masters of the Bench (December 2015) is listed in alphabetical order. For further details on specific appointments please see recent election results .
Designated and Departmental Benchers
Designated and Departmental Benchers hold roles specific to key areas of the Inn’s affairs or a particular department of the Inn.  Roles include:
Master of Education
Master of the Estate
Master of Finance
Master of the Library
Master of Students
You can find a full list of all Designated and Departmental Masters and their responsibilities in part 1, section 10 of the Inn’s rules.
Royal and Honorary Benchers
Royal and Honorary Benchers are elected from non-members of outstanding public eminence and distinction or who have rendered great service to the Inn. Royal and Honorary Benchers do not have a vote at Pension. Please see the election results for details on recent appointments. The first Honorary Benchers were elected in 1883 .
Find out more
Past Benchers
Past Honorary Benchers
Search a listing of all past Honorary Benchers dating back to the first Honorary Benchers elected in 1883.
Find out more
Management Committee
Sitemap
Privacy Policy
Cookie Notice
© Gray's Inn 2016