FEB
APR
May
14
2015
2016
2017
34 captures
31 May 12 - 19 Apr 16
Close Help
 
IBA Home
Division home
Committee index
This committee's menu:
Committee home
Publications
Officers
Legal Resources
Education, internships and scholarships
Mooting resources and information
Home
IBA and the Jessup Moot
Worldwide list of moots
Advice project
Students' memories
ICC Moot Court Manual
My IBA |
Join the IBA |
IBA Committees |
Cookies |
Terms of use |
Privacy policy
 
How to qualify as a lawyer in England and Wales
[ b ack to list of countries ]
Introduction
Embarking on a legal career in England and Wales can be, as with other jurisdictions, a lengthy and complicated process. There are many stages, spanning a period of several years, which need to be completed in order to become a qualified lawyer.
The legal system of England and Wales is comprised of both common law and statute. The common law is created through decisions in the courts made by judges, who are trusted to follow previous decisions under the principle of stare decisis – legal precedent. The highest court is the UK Supreme Court, and its decisions are binding on all other courts. Statute is created via Acts of Parliament; the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty stipulates that no institution is more powerful than Parliament.
Lawyers in England and Wales can practice as either solicitors or barristers. The top solicitors are often Partners or Senior Partners in successful law firms, while the leading Barristers become QCs (Queen’s Counsel), and Judges.
The differences between Barristers and Solicitors
Barristers specialise in courtroom advocacy. It used to be that only Barristers had the right to represent clients in the higher courts, but now some solicitors may also obtain higher rights of audience. However, the Bar is still predominantly a referral profession with barristers acting on the instructions of solicitors rather than dealing with clients directly – although barristers may provide legal advice to clients when specialist expertise is needed. Barristers are self-employed individual practitioners who generally work in groups known as chambers.
Solicitors work directly with clients, providing legal advice. Solicitors can also represent their clients in the lower courts and some solicitors, who have ‘higher rights of audience’, are permitted to represent clients in the higher courts. Solicitors can practice alone, in partnership with other solicitors, or be employed in private practice or in government.
Education - applicable to Barrister and Solicitors
In order to become a lawyer in England and Wales, there are no specific subject requirements at high school. Despite the lack of specific requirements, it is highly recommended that candidates choose subjects which show an aptitude for writing, researching and logical thought. It is expected that candidates achieve formidable A-Level results, but the requirements depend on the institution. A small group of prestigious universities also require applicants to sit the National Admissions Test for Law (LNAT). This is an aptitude test based on reasoning and essay skills.
Undergraduate Law Degree
The most conventional route to becoming a lawyer is by reading Law as an undergraduate. Almost every university in England and Wales offers Law at undergraduate level, and applications rise each year.
A standard LLB undergraduate law course takes three years to complete. To qualify as a barrister or solicitor students are required to obtain a ‘qualifying law degree’. For an LLB to meet the requirements of a ‘qualifying law degree’ the course must cover legal research skills and the seven foundation subjects:
Obligations I (Contract Law)
Obligations II (Tort Law)
Foundations of Criminal Law
Foundations of Equity & the Law of Trusts
Foundations of the Law of the European Union
Foundations of Property Law
Foundations of Public Law
The requirement for completion of the Academic Stage is a lower second class UK Honours degree. However due to the fierce competition for training contract or pupillage, students who have not obtained an upper second class UK Honours degree may find the process challenging – and a number of top chambers rarely consider applicants with anything less than a first class UK Honours degree.
However, students who have not taken an undergraduate degree in law can still become lawyers. For students with undergraduate degrees in subjects besides law, it is possible to enrol in the Graduate Diploma in Law course (GDL). This is a one year full-time or two years part-time course, which covers the seven foundation subjects, and results in an LLB on passing. Law firms do not look unfavourably on students with non-Law undergraduate degrees when recruiting trainees; in several firms, around half the trainees recruited each year come from non-Law backgrounds.1  Barristers chambers are also becoming more accepting of this educational route.
Training as a Solicitor
To become a solicitor, it is necessary to take the Legal Practice Course (LPC), which is a one year full-time or two years part-time course. In some cases, students may be fortunate enough to have a training contract offer from a law firm at this stage. Quite often, the law firm will pay for the tuition of the LPC, where fees rarely fall below £10,000.
The LPC is a vocational course tailored to prepare students for a career in a law firm. The modules are focused less on the educational aspects of law and more of the commercial side of law firms. There is no degree classification for this course; students pass (with merit or distinction) or fail. Of all the candidates in 2009, 75% passed the course.2
Customarily students will have completed at least one vacation scheme at a solicitors’ firm, during their academic or vocational training, prior to applying for a training contract.
Following the LPC, student must obtain a training contract; this is two years spent in an authorised training establishment, usually a solicitors’ firm, under the supervision of a training principal. This is perhaps the largest hurdle to overcome; the application process is long and competitive. However, the financial rewards for getting this far are considerable. In London, the average trainee is paid £25,000 per annum. International and ‘Magic Circle’ firms pay considerably more.
Training as a Barrister
With far fewer spaces for potential barristers, this route is more competitive than that of a solicitor. Chambers often require first class degrees from students; only highly capable students should embark on this path.
All barristers must be a member of one of the four Inns of Court (Lincolns Inn, Gray’s Inn, Middle Temple and Inner Temple) as you can only become a barrister if you have been ‘called to the bar’ by an Inn of Court. Before students can be ‘called to the bar’ by their Inn they must complete 12 qualifying sessions at their Inn, which consist of collegiate and educational activities such as: dinners, moots, lectures, and residential courses. The Inns can provide financial support through scholarships, as well as providing important help and advice to aspiring barristers. All students should join an Inn before commencing their Bar Professional Training Course.
Graduates must complete the Bar Professional Training Course (BPTC) – formerly the Bar Vocational Course (BVC) – which is a one year full-time or two years part-time course. Only 67% of applicants obtain a place at ‘Bar School’, while only 76% of enrolees were successful in passing the course in 2009.3  In some cases students will have obtained pupillage before beginning their BPTC, and may be able to have a salary advance to help with the costs of the BPTC, where fees rarely fall below £12,000.
Customarily students will have completed a number of ‘mini-pupillages’ during their academic and vocational training, and possibly have carried out some marshalling (which involves shadowing a judge), prior to applying for pupillage.
After successfully passing the BPTC, prospective barristers must obtain pupillage, which is one year spent in an authorised pupillage training organisation, usually a barristers’ chambers, being trained by their pupil master. It used to be the case that students had to pay their pupil master for the privilege of carrying out pupillage with them. However pupils are now paid for their pupillage year – and often quite handsomely. However, unlike trainee solicitors, pupils are rarely paid a fixed rate – which reflects the self-employed nature of the profession. Remuneration will be determined by the quantity and prestige of the cases which the pupil manages to take on in the latter 6 months of their training.
Finally you must obtain tenancy in a set of barristers’ chambers, or go into employed practice with an organisation which employs barristers.
Requalification
For qualified lawyers coming from outside England and Wales, it is still possible to practice.
The Solicitors Regulation Authority does not impose any formal experience requirements in order to re-qualify as solicitors in England and Wales. Some law firms may express their own requirements which can differ from the SRA guidelines. Candidates can take the Qualified Lawyers Transfer Scheme in order to qualify under this jurisdiction.
Lawyers coming from EU Member States can rely on EU Directive 77/249 in this area. European lawyers can practice to the same level as they did in the own country. However, it is not possible to be a barrister and solicitor simultaneously.
Summary
As has been shown, becoming a solicitor or a barrister in England in Wales takes great levels of commitment, a high intellect and a good work ethic. The benefits, both financially and personally, are rewarding.
Useful Links
Solicitors Regulation Authority: http://www.sra.org.uk/solicitors/solicitors.page
Bar Standards Board: http://www.barstandardsboard.org.uk/
Qualified Lawyers Transfer Scheme School: http://www.qlts.co.uk/
The Law Society: http://www.lawsociety.org.uk/home.law
Bar Council: http://www.barcouncil.org.uk/
1 Chambers Student UK, Careers in the Law (Chambers and Partners, 2010)
2 < http://www.the-art-of-law.co.uk/category/job/solicitorjobs/ > accessed 12 May 2011
3 < http://www.barstandardsboard.org.uk/news/statistics/ > accessed 12 May 2011
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Written by Adam Beach
 
About the IBA |
About this site |
Terms and conditions |
Sitemap |
Recruitment |
Glossary of terms |
Contact us
International Bar Association 2016
Our other websites
Rule of Law Directory
Regulation of the legal profession
IBA Anti-Money Laundering Forum
IBA International Pro Bono
Anti-Corruption Strategy for the Legal Profession
ICC & ICL Programme
International Human Rights Fact-Finding Guidelines
Law Firm Management Knowledge Database
Twitter updates
Tweets by @IBAnews
Our London office
International Bar Association
4th Floor, 10 St Bride Street
London, EC4A 4AD
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (0)20 7842 0090
Fax: +44 (0)20 7842 0091
Our other offices