Feb
MAR
Apr
22
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
22 Mar 16 - 22 Mar 16
Close Help
Ancient Egyptian Facts .com
Ancient Egypt Facts for Kids, History, Daily Life, Mummies
Pre- dynastic
Early Dynastic (c.3050-2686 BC)
Old Kingdom (2686-2181 BC)
First Intermediate (2181 -1991 BC)
Middle Kingdom (2134-1690 BC)
Second Intermediate (1674-1549 BC)
New Kingdom (1549-1069 BC)
Third Intermediate (1069-653 BC)
Late Period (672-332 BC)
Ptolemaic
Roman
Home Ancient Egypt
Egyptian Canopic Jars
Interesting Facts
Nile River Importance
Physical Features
Timeline of Egypt
Afterlife Concept
Egyptian Amulets
Animals in Ancient Egypt
Egyptian Architecture
Artifacts & Art
Artwork & Artisans
Egyptian Astronomy
Boats / Ships
Bread Making
Calendar Concept
Cats Significance
Cities and Towns
Weather / Climate
Dressing / Clothing
Ancient Egypt Costumes
Ancient Egypt Culture1
Egyptian Culture2
Ancient Egypt Culture3
Ancient Egypt Currency
Curses Belief
Ancient Egypt Customs
Daily Life of People
Deities Names
Diet & Food Habits
Economy & Trade
Education System
Egyptian Engineering  1
Egyptian Engineering  2
Facts for Kids
Farming & Agriculture
Ancient Egypt Gods1
Ancient Egypt Gods2
Ancient Egypt Gods3
Egyptian Government
Egyptian Headress
Egyptian Hieroglyphics
Ancient Egypt Homes
Houses Information
Egyptian Inventions  1
Egyptian Inventions  2
Egyptian Irrigation
Egyptian Jewellery
Jobs & Occupations
Kids / Children's Life
Egyptian Language
Egyptian Legal System
Ancient Egypt Location
Temple of Luxor
Ancient Egypt Marriages
Masks Designs
Maths & Number System
Egyptian Medicines
Ancient Egypt Military
More Articles
More Information
Ancient Egypt FAQ
 
Aegyptus
Here are some facts about the roman province of Egypt: Aegyptus
The Roman province of Egypt (Aegyptus) was established in 30 BC.
The rulers of the ancient Egyptian dynasties lost the control of Egyptian   towards the end of 1st millennium BC. Egypt became a Roman province under the reign of Augustus in 30 BC, after his victory over Mark Anthony and Queen Cleopatra. The capital of Egypt was Alexandria. As per the Greek mythology, the name Aegyptus is derived from the name of an ancient Greek ruler known as Aegyptus. Ancient Egyptian Aegyptus was a roman province of Egypt named after him.
Augustus had appointed Gaius Cornelius Gallus, the first governor of Egypt.  The employment of a governor brought an end to the political influence in Egypt. The governor was at the top of the hierarchy, followed by the administration of justice. He was made the head of the military security, assisted by legions and cohorts to secure peace and order. Roman law governed the business matters. Romans derived huge sums of revenue from Egypt.
For smooth functioning of administration, Egypt was divided into small provinces along with establishment of town councils. In 3rd century, the town councils and its officials were given administrative responsibility. The Greeks had the council of elders, independent of the town council. The system of centralized governing was followed until 4th century AD.
The Romans developed a complex tax system in Egypt. Taxes were levied on land and could be paid in cash or kind. The officials collected small taxes in cash. In Egypt, a person was allowed to own property and it was necessary for the owner of a property to perform public service.
Also, an officer was appointed, who was required to find out about the property when no one claimed ownership. People who did not own a land lived as tenants on land owned by the state, the wealthy or the king. Poll tax was introduced by the Romans. Citizens of metropolises paid less tax than the Egyptians.
The system of social hierarchy was introduced by Romans whereby Romans and Greek were at the top, followed by the metropolite and lastly the people staying in villages. In Egypt people could apply for citizenship either by joining the army or being a part of the legions. To become a citizen of Alexandria, a person was required to show that his parents were its citizens.  Only the Alexandrians were allowed to have Roman citizenship.
Egypt was an essential source of food for the Romans. The food was transported from Egypt to Rome. During the 1st and 2nd century, trading activity in the Roman province flourished. Goods were exchanged for coins. The Egyptians had revolted against the excessive taxation levied to cover up the losses in revenue during the 3rd century. This revolution resulted in the gradual decline of Egypt's economy.
The Roman province (Ancient Egypt Aegyptus) was a center for Christianity. It is also the place where Coptic Christian sect is believed to have originated. As Christianity spread throughout Egypt, Christians began to settle here. Not much is known about how exactly Christianity was introduced in Egypt. Alexandria was the biggest center of Christianity.
The Roman province supported principles like Arianism, Gnosticism, Manichaeism and Monasticism. After the partition of the Roman Empire in two parts, Egypt was a part of the Byzantine Empire and Constantinople was its new capital. However, Greek remained the popular language of Egypt. However, Alexandria remained the religious and economic center. It also continued to be the main source of food supply for the Romans.
- Facts for kids about ancient Egyptian Afgyptus
- Roman province Aegyptus of Ancient Egypt
Money & Coins
Recreation Part 1
Trading of Goods
Famous Monuments
Recreation Part 2
Translation Of Hieroglyphics
Mummies / Mummification
Religion Part 1
Transportation System
Music in Ancient Egypt
Religion Part 2
Viziers Ranking
Musical Instruments
Religious Beliefs
Famous Wars Fought
Myths Part 1: Creation, Eye of Ra
Sarcophagus
Weaponry & Chain of Command
Myths Part 2: Death
Children's Schools
Common Weapons Used in War
Names and Meanings
Science and Technology
Women's Life Part 1
Numbering System
Role of Scribes
Women's Life Part 2
Obelisks Designs
Life of Slaves & Slavery
Status of Women
Paintings Style, Colours
Social Classes in Ancient Egypt
British Museum and Ancient Egypt
Papyrus Invention
Soldiers in the Army
Burial Tombs In Ancient Egypt
Pharaohs Dynasties
Sphinxes - majestic monuments
Concept of Afterlife
Pottery Designs
Common Sports Played
Farming In Ancient Egypt
Priests' Role
Famous Statues
Common Food and Drink
Process Of Embalming
Symbols and Meanings
King Tutankhamun of Egypt
Famous Proverbs
Tattoos and Designs
Sun God: Ra
Queens Part 1: Cleopatra
Technology Advancements
The Pyramids of Ancient Egypt
Queens Part 2: Other Queens
Temples' Significance
Valley of The Kings
Popular Quotes
Commonly used Tools
Pictures/Photos
About Us
Privacy Policy
Copyright
Disclaimer
This page last updated in Jan 2014
Copyright 2014 - All rights reserved