Feb
MAR
Apr
21
2015
2016
2017
3 captures
19 Mar 16 - 19 Apr 16
Close Help
for Teachers   for Schools   for Companies
Log In
Menu
Plans
Courses Courses
Find Courses by Subject
Find Courses by Subject
Science
Math
Business
Psychology
History
English
Social Science
Humanities
Spanish
ACT & SAT Test Prep
Teacher Certification
Professional Development
By Education Level
By Education Level
College
High School
Middle School
Browse All Courses
Explore Over
1000+
video courses
Browse All Courses
Credit Credit
Credit Options
Online College Credit
High School & GED
Certificates of Completion
How it Works
Earn Transferable Credit & Get your Degree fast
Learn More
Degrees Degrees
Find Degrees by Subject
Find Degrees by Subject
Agriculture
Architecture
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
Business
Communications and Journalism
Computer Sciences
Culinary Arts and Personal Services
Education
 
Engineering
Legal
Liberal Arts and Humanities
Mechanic and Repair Technologies
Medical and Health Professions
Physical Sciences
Psychology
Transportation and Distribution
Visual and Performing Arts
Find Degrees by Level
By Level
High School Diploma
Associates Degrees
Bachelor Degrees
Master Degrees
Online Degrees
Search All Degrees
Find a Degree that fits your Goals
Search Degrees
Schools Schools
Browse Schools by Degree Level
Browse Schools by Degree Level
Graduate Degrees
High School Diplomas
Certificate Programs
Post Degree Certificates
Undergraduate Degrees
Browse Schools
Browse Schools
Public Schools by State
University Video Reviews
Career Counseling & Job Center
Career Counseling & Job Center
Job Interviewing Tip Videos
Job Networking Videos
Résumé How To Videos
Job Search Tips
Career Videos
Career Research
Career Research
Researching Careers Videos
Glossary of Careers
Career Info by Degree
Job Outlook by Region
Degree & Career Research Articles
Create Account
Contact Support
Login
Sign Up
for Teachers   for Schools   for Companies
Copyright
 Harcourt Social Studies - World History: Online Textbook Help  /  History Courses
Course Navigator
Old Kingdom of Ancient Egypt: Timeline & FactsNext Lesson 
The Unification of Upper & Lower Egypt
Chapter 4 /  Lesson 3
Lesson
Quiz & Worksheet - Uniting Upper & Lower Egypt Quiz
Course
Watch short & fun videos Start Your Free Trial Today
Instructor: Christopher Muscato
Chris has a master's degree in history and teaches college courses on Latin American history and American history.
Like this lesson Share
Before there was a single Egypt, there were Upper and Lower kingdoms. The unification of these kingdoms started the true era of ancient Egyptian history, and in this lesson we'll talk about what we know about this, as well as what we don't.
The Egyptian Kingdoms
When we talk about ancient Egypt, we're often talking about a period in which pharaohs ruled as kings over a vast empire, starting around 2686 BCE. That's a very specific date, isn't it? So here are a couple of questions for you. Where did those Egyptians come from, and what changed in exactly 2686 BCE? Civilization didn't just randomly appear in the desert one day.
In fact, archaeological evidence suggests that humans had developed settled societies along the Nile River as early as 6,000 BCE. These people formed several kingdoms that, while they shared cultural traits, were nevertheless independent states. Then, in 2686 BCE, they were unified under a single pharaoh, and the culture we know as ancient Egypt was truly under way.
The double crown of united ancient Egypt.
Upper and Lower Egypt
Prior to the unification of a single Egypt, most Egyptians lived under the rule of one of two distinct kingdoms. To understand this, it's first important to remember that the Nile River flows from south to north, emptying into the Mediterranean Sea at the Nile Delta. The northernmost part of the Nile, being the end of the river, is referred to as Lower Egypt. This was one of Egypt's early kingdoms, known at the time as the Black Land, for the dark, fertile soil of the Delta. The Lower Egyptian kings wore a red crown, and used a bee as their royal symbol.
To their south, near the origins of the Nile, was Upper Egypt. It was known as the Red Land for the sunbaked desert sand, and was ruled by a king in a white crown whose symbol was a sedge, a kind of plant resembling tall marsh grass.
The Unification of Egypt
There are very few surviving records from the Archaic period, the era before the unification of Egypt, so there is actually very little about this that we know for certain. However, according to most accounts, the unification of the two kingdoms occurred in the early third millennium BCE when the king of Upper Egypt invaded and conquered the kingdom of Lower Egypt. Again, the traditional date for this is 2686 BCE, although there is some disagreement on the exact year.
Nevertheless, it's apparent that these two kingdoms were unified under a single king, who took the title of pharaoh. Archaeologically, some of the evidence of unification comes from the mixing of the traditions of each kingdom. The pharaohs of the united Egypt wore a double crown that combined the red and white crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt into one. Religious traditions also mixed, leading to changing ideas about the gods. Most notably, all the people of unified Egypt starting worshipping the pharaoh as an incarnation of the hawk-god Horus, making Horus the first national deity to be fully embraced by both kingdoms together.
Horus wearing the double crown.
The King Who Unified Egypt
So, Upper and Lower Egypt were unified, and the king who managed this became Egypt's first pharaoh, establishing his capital in the city of Memphis near the Nile Delta. So, who was this king? We're actually not completely sure. There are two names that frequently appear throughout Egyptian sources.
First is Menes. Menes is recognized as the first pharaoh of Egypt and the king to unite the old kingdoms, according to many sources. However, other sources attribute this to a king named Narmer. Many historians now believe that these were the same person. Menes would have been his original name, but according to Egyptian traditions, when pharaohs were crowned they received a Horus name, a royal name recognizing their semi-divine status. Narmer was most likely the Horus name of Menes, making these the same person.
×
Unlock Content
Over 10,000 lessons in all major subjects
Get FREE access for 5 days,
just create an account.
Start a FREE trial
No obligation, cancel anytime.
Want to learn more?
Select a subject to preview related courses:
Math
History
English
ACT/SAT
Science
Business
Psychology
AP
However, there is another possible explanation as well. Some scholars don't think this person ever actually existed, but much like King Arthur, was a mythical ruler who was in reality a compilation of several historic figures. We may never know for sure, although at this time the general consensus is that Menes/Narmer was a single, real person. Regardless, whoever it was that unified Egypt and became its first pharaoh managed to establish one of the most powerful and enduring empires of all time.
On this carving, believed to depict the unification of Egypt, kings with the Upper and Lower crowns can be seen on each side.
Lesson Summary
Before the era of pharaohs and a single Egyptian empire, Egypt was divided into different kingdoms. Historians call this the Archaic period of Egyptian history. In the north, near the Nile Delta, was the kingdom of Lower Egypt, known as the Black Land for its dark soil and ruled by a king in a red crown. South of them was Upper Egypt, called the Red Land for its sunbaked soil and ruled by a king in a white crown.
Sometime around 2686 BCE, Upper Egypt came north and invaded Lower Egypt, unifying the two kingdoms under a single ruler who took the title of pharaoh and wore a double crown. Most accounts attribute this moment to King Menes or King Narmer. It's likely that these were two names for the same king, although some scholars think this was a mythical, rather than real, figure. We may never know for sure who unified Egypt, but this unification did happen, and it created an empire that would reshape the world.
To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
Create your account
Register for a free trial
Are you a student or a teacher?
I am a student
I am a teacher
What is your educational goal?
 Back
Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 10 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In
 Back
Description
Summary:
Visit the Harcourt Social Studies - World History: Online Textbook Help page to learn more.
Earning Credit
Earning College Credit
Did you know… We have over 49 college                     courses that prepare you to earn                     credit by exam that is accepted by over 2,000 colleges and universities. You can test out of the                     first two years of college and save thousands off your degree. Anyone can earn                     credit-by-exam regardless of age or education level.
To learn more, visit our Earning Credit Page
Transferring credit to the school of your choice
Not sure what college you want to attend yet? Study.com has thousands of articles about every                         imaginable degree, area of                         study                         and career path that can help you find the school that's right for you.
Research Schools, Degrees & Careers
Get the unbiased info you need to find the right school.
Browse Articles By Category
Browse an area of study or degree level.
Area of Study
Agriculture
Architecture
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
Business
Communications and Journalism
Computer Sciences
Culinary Arts and Personal Services
Education
Engineering
Legal
Liberal Arts and Humanities
Mechanic and Repair Technologies
Medical and Health Professions
Physical Sciences
Psychology
Transportation and Distribution
Visual and Performing Arts
Degree Level
High School Diploma
Associates Degrees
Bachelor Degrees
Master Degrees
Online Degrees
Recommended Articles
Recently Updated
Popular
Step-by-Step Guide to Writing Compare and Contrast Essays
Performing Arts Adult Education Programs
Forensic Science Continuing Education Programs
Associate of Science AS Marketing and Advertising Degree Overview
Masters Degree in Sociology Program Overview
Automobile Mechanics College
Bachelors Degree in Sales Program Summary
Java Classes
×
Course Navigator
 Back To Course
Harcourt Social Studies - World History: Online Textbook Help
19 chapters | 195 lessons
1 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 1:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 1: The World's Geography
2 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 2:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 2: Early People
3 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 3:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 3: The Tigris & Euphrates Valley
4 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 4:...
The Ancient Nile Valley: Civilizations, Region & Facts 6:21
Funerary Beliefs, Practices & Temples in Ancient Egypt 5:22
The Unification of Upper & Lower Egypt
6:00
Next Lesson
Old Kingdom of Ancient Egypt: Timeline & Facts
Middle Kingdom of Ancient Egypt: Definition & Timeline
The New Kingdom of Egypt: Pharaohs, Temples & Timeline 10:32
Ancient Egyptian Buildings: Old, Middle & New Kingdoms 6:12
Cultures of Ancient Nubia 7:08
The Kushite Conquest of Egypt 5:18
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 4: The Nile Valley
5 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 5:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 5: Asia & the Americas
6 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 6:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 6: Southwest Asian Civilizations
7 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 7:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 7: Asia's Classical Age
8 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 8:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 8: The Ancient Greeks
9 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 9:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 9: The Ancient Romans
10 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 10:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 10: Europe After the Romans
11 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 11:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 11: Africa & Asia
12 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 12:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 12: The Americas
13 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 13:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 13: New Empires
14 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 14:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 14: The Growth of Trade
15 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 15:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 15: Europe & the Western Hemisphere
16 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 16:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 16: The Eastern Hemisphere
17 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 17:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 17: Times of Rapid Change
18 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 18:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 18: Times of War & Times of Peace
19 - Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 19:...
Go to Harcourt Social Studies - World History Chapter 19: Global Challenges
Like this lesson Share
Explore our library of over 10,000 lessons
Search
Browse
Browse by subject
College Courses
Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses
High School Courses
AP
Common Core
GED
High School
See All High School Courses
Other Courses
College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses
Click "next lesson" whenever you finish a lesson and quiz. Got It
You now have full access to our lessons and courses. Watch the lesson now or keep exploring. Got It
You're 25% of the way through this course! Keep going at this rate,and you'll be done before you know it.
Follow Us:
Home | About Us | Careers | Teach for Us | FAQ | Contact Support
Terms of Use | Privacy Policy
© copyright 2003-                           2016 Study.com. All other trademarks and copyrights are         the property of their respective owners. All rights reserved.