OCT
MAR
Apr
25
2014
2016
2017
12 captures
10 Mar 14 - 25 Mar 16
Close Help
Home
About Us
Meet Christa
Meet the Little
What is Fairytale Travel
My Cool Job
Fairytale Travel
Destinations
North America
Europe
Norway
Ireland
United Kingdom
American Folklore
Cool History and Legends
Book to Film
Fairies and Enchantment
Castles
Fairytale Holiday Travel
Mermaid Beaches
Creepy Stuff We Love
Fairytale Sleeps
Castle Hotels
Luxury Dream Hotels
Most Romantic Fairytale Sleeps
Kid’s Corner
About the Little Fairytale Traveler
Mom’s Corner
Memoirs of a Traveling Mom
A Fairytale Traveler Bucket List
Travel Tips
Global Kids Linkup
Bloglovin
The Geek Store
Travel Gear and Tech
Fandom Gifts, Fashion, Home Decor & More
Search and hit
Go
Ancient History Celtic Myth and Lore Christian Myth and Lore Cool History and Legends Destinations Europe Family Travel Ireland Medieval History Mythology and Lore
The Book of Kells at Trinity College, Dublin
By Christa Thompson //
December 17, 2013
Tweet Share
Ireland’s Finest National Treasure
During my recent visit to Dublin, Ireland I was able to make my way over to the Old Library at Trinity College, home to the Book of Kells Exhibit.
Making its way from a scriptorium of the monastery founded near 561 by St. Colum Cille on Iona, just off the western coast of Scotland, the Book of Kells has become widely known as the most stunning, elaborate, and lavish work of Insular illumination in history.
Made ca. 800 (or even earlier) by Celtic monks, is an illuminated manuscript written in Latin that contains the four Gospels of the New Testament.
Mainly based on the Vulgate, it also contains passages from early versions of the Bible, the Vetus Latina.
The Long Library and the Book of Kells Exhibit in Dublin by Christa Thompson
The Old library at Trinity College in Dublin where the Book of Kells Exhibit permanently lives by Christa Thompson 2013
It is a masterwork of  Western calligraphy  and represents the pinnacle of  Insular illumination .
It is also widely regarded as Ireland’s finest national treasure.
-Wikipedia
Celtic Church scholars preserved the ancient texts.
Its extravagant illustrations and ornate details surmounts other Insular Gospel books.
It’s manuscript’s pages are decorated in great detail depicting humans, animals and mythological beasts.
Bordered with Celtic knots and vibrant patterns, the imagery in the Book of Kells is infused with Christian symbolism.
Book of Kells Facts:
It attracts over 500,000 visitors annually.
Manuscript has 340 folios.
Written on calf vellum.
Lettering is in iron gall ink.
Colors imported from far away lands many made from plant and animal pigments.
Named after the Abbey of Kells in Co Meath where it lived for centuries.
The entire manuscript can be viewed on the Library’s  Digital Collections  portal.
The manuscript was never finished.
The Fairytale Traveler Experience at the Book of Kells:
The entire first floor of the Book of Kells exhibit is set up nicely as a self guided tour through blown up illuminated replicas of the manuscript.
I strongly advise you spending the 5 euro to get the audio mp3 player with headphones that you keep.
Well worth the extra cheddar.
You’re not allowed to photograph the exhibit downstairs so, best I can explain is it’s stunning, well laid out, and easy to work through.
It is guided by numbers leading to the back where there are 2 displays of actual manuscripts that they rotate out.
The ornate details are surreal and quite honestly, mind boggling.
On display in the Long Room by Christa Thompson
On display in the Long Room by Christa Thompson
Upstairs in one of the most beautifully crafted libraries in the world, dating back to the 18th century, is the Long Room.
The  Long Room  houses 200,000 of the Library’s oldest books in its oak bookcases.
It also boasts a small display for Bram Stoker, with a first edition copy of the famous Gothic novel, Dracula.
On display in the Long Room by Christa Thompson
On display in the Long Room by Christa Thompson
Famous Irish writers in the Long Room, by Christa Thompson
On display in the Long Room by Christa Thompson
On display in the Long Room by Christa Thompson
On display in the Long Room by Christa Thompson
Share the Adventure!
Related
Abbey of Kells
Book of Kells
Bram Stoker
Dublin
Iona
Ireland
Long Library
Long Room
the Old Library at Trinity
Trinity College
Vetus Latina
About Christa Thompson
view all posts
Christa Thompson is the Founder and Senior Editor of The Fairytale Traveler.
Christa has been traveling the world since 2003 when she attended a summer abroad study at the University of Cambridge in England.
Since then, her wanderlust has been fierce.
Her three passions in life are her son, traveling, and being creative.
The Fairytale Traveler brand gives Christa the opportunity to do all of these things and to live intentionally every day.
"It's never too late to believe in what you love and to pursue your dreams."
-Christa Thompson
4 Comments on this post
A truly remarkable document!
Thanks for sharing this experience!
sistersofthebruce.wordpress.com
diaspora52 /
November 5, 2013
Reply
Glad you enjoyed it.
Christa Thompson @ChristaTravels /
November 5, 2013
(in reply to diaspora52) Reply
I remember talking about this in a couple of my art classes in University.
It’s definitely on my list of “Things to do when in Ireland”.
Megan Shier (@meggiekay) /
November 13, 2013
Reply
[…] are widely known and one which is less heard of by tourists (more on this in the Go Dark section).
Trinity’s Long Library is probably the most popular as it’s home to the permanent Book of Kells exhibit as well as […]
8 Awesome Ways to Tour Dublin the UNESCO City of Literature /
February 3, 2016
Reply
We love hearing your thoughts, stories and adventures.
Share them here:
Cancel reply
Search
Search
Hi it's me!
Christa Thompson, a wanderlusting nerdy mom with a serious commitment to discovering a real unicorn.
When I'm not traveling the globe in search of fandom, film locations, legends, myth and lore, I'm doing normal mom stuff, nerd style.
Never Miss a Post!
First Name:
Last Name:
Email address:
FEELING LUCKY?
OUR NEW YOUTUBE!
ON THE RED CARPET
Wearing American Blossoms
FACEBOOK LUVINS
FACEBOOK LUVINS
Follow Us on Twitter
My Tweets
ON INSTAGRAM!
Load More...
Follow on Instagram
People Be LUVIN
Book to Film
A Killer Guide to Universal Studios Diagon Alley
September 9, 2014
63468
5 Enchanting Trips Steeped in Legends Along Ireland’s Wild Atlantic Way
April 21, 2014
36840
Fairytale Destination Colmar, France
August 24, 2013
35590
Badges
PROUD TO BE
MY PRINT COLUMN
Check out my travel column in FAE Faeries and Enchantment is a UK lifestyle magazine in print and digital download sold in major book retailers world wide.
OUR PARTNERS
Home
Our Partners
Media Kit
In the Press
Contact
Be a Contributor
Privacy Policy
The Fairytale Traveler
The Fairytale Traveler is a travel & lifestyle blog inspired by myth, legends, books, film and fandoms.
We're just a single mom and a little boy in a world of unicorns and superheroes.
Film locations, literary trails, historic sites, castles, cons and otherworldly places for the geeky adventurer.
©2013-2016 Travel Media Solutions, LLC DBA The Fairytale Traveler All Rights Reserved
Login
Register
Log in
Entries RSS
Comments RSS
WordPress.org
Follow  Us
ARCHIVES
ARCHIVES
Visit The Fairytale Traveler's profile on Pinterest.