Mar
APR
May
22
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
22 Apr 16 - 22 Apr 16
Close Help
About
Admissions
Academics
Library
Student Life
News & Events
Directory
Home  >
News & Events  >
News Story
Jena Six: Waiting for Justice
Release date: October 29,                         2007
Issues of injustice, racism, and inequality relating to the Jena Six and other such polarizing incidents will be addressed at a panel discussion on Monday, October 29, from 6 to 8 p.m. in Goucher College’s Haebler Memorial Chapel.
This event is free and open to the public, and refreshments will be served.
This gathering is not meant to serve as an information session on what happened to the students of Jena, rather it will be an opportunity for students, faculty, staff, and the greater community to ask questions about the political and social injustices surrounding the incident and how a peaceable outcome might be reached.
Panelists will be:
• Dr. Nsenga Burton – Multi-media producer and professor of communications at Goucher College
• Dr. Kelly Brown Douglas – Chair and professor of religion and philosophy at Goucher College
•  Russell Neverdon – Attorney
• Sanford J. Ungar – President of Goucher College and former director of Voice of America
• Romaine Williams – Minister and attorney
The Jena Six refers to a group of six black teenagers who have been charged with the beating of Justin Barker, a white teenager at Jena High School in Jena, LA, on December 4, 2006.
The beating followed a number of racially charged incidents in the town.
The case has sparked protests — in Jena and elsewhere — by those who believe the arrests and the subsequent charges were excessive and racially discriminatory.
Media Inquiries
Office of Communications
Calendar of Events
Goucher in the Media
Goucher President's Office Speaker Series
Podcasts
Publications
News Archive
Events, Conferences, & Summer Programs
Expert Listing
Request Events Calendar
Print
Email
Share
Quick Links
Athletics
Bookstore
Campus Handbook
Campus Map
Contact & Directions
Email
Financial Aid
Give to Goucher
GoucherLearn
GoucherTech
Information for New Students
InsideGoucher
myGoucher
Public Safety
Report a Concern
Request Info
Starfish
Visit Campus
Emergency Information     Consumer Information     Jobs     Privacy Policy     About This Site
Follow Us
Goucher College ∙ 1021 Dulaney Valley Road ∙ Baltimore, Maryland 21204 ∙ USA ∙ telephone 410.337.6000
Copyright © 2016 Goucher College