Transkript von Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
Issue(s)
Did the University of California violate the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection clause by holding an affirmative action policy that kept Allan Bakke out the medical school?
Can race be considered as a factor in the admissions process?
Brief Fact Summary
The Respondent,
Allan Bakke
, a white applicant to the University of California, Davis Medical School, sued the University, alleging his denial of admission on racial grounds was a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution.
The University of California, Davis Medical School
reserved 16 spots out of the 100 in any given class for “disadvantaged minorities.” The Respondent, when compared to students admitted under
the affirmative action
program, had more favorable objective indicia of performance, while his race was the only distinguishing characteristic. The Respondent sued, alleging that the affirmative action program denied him equal protection of laws under the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution.
Affirmative Action
The process of a business or governmental agency in which it gives special rights of hiring or advancement to ethnic minorities to make up for past discrimination against that minority. Affirmative action has been the subject of legal battles on the basis that it is reverse discrimination against Caucasians, but in most challenges to affirmative action the programs have been upheld.
Conclusion
The Supreme Court’s decision in Bakke was announced on June 28, 1978
5 votes for Bakke,4 votes against
Justice Powell
’s opinion is the controlling opinion of the Court
The supreme court agreed that the university’s use of strict racial quotas was unconstitutional
Powell wrote that the use of race should be subject to
“strict scrutiny”
meaning that there should be a compelling governmental interest in using race
Strict scrutiny is a form of judicial review that courts use to determine the constitutionality of certain laws.
Strict Scrutiny:
Because the special admissions program involved in a racial classification, the supreme court [of California] held itself bound to apply strict scrutiny. It then turned to the goals the University presented as justifying the special program.
The California court held that the Equal Protection Clause required that "no applicant may be rejected because of his race, in favor of another who is less qualified, as measured by standards applied without regard to race."
The decision of the case lead to a change in the acceptation process of the Universities.
Starting from the decision of the supreme court for Allen Bakke, racial classification is no longer the only criteria to accept admissions. race is only one of the facts of the criteria.
The Bakke case resulted in the ruling that affirmative action -is- constitutional, but that it can not use a "quota system" based on race.
''The Supreme Court decision actually encouraged affirmative action goals by allowing the use of race and other determinants in academic achievement as acceptable admissions criteria,'' Dr. Robert G. Petersdorf, president of the Association of American Medical Colleges,
''Bakke was significant because it didn't put the brakes on affirmative action,'' said Rennard Strickland, dean of the Southern Illinois University Law School