Regents of the University of California v.Bakke
In order to understand the role of affirmative action in today’s society, we must first understand the history of affirmative action.
The first publicized Supreme Court case that challenged affirmative action was the Regents of the University of California v. Bakke.
Allan P. Bakke was rejected from the Davis School of Medicine, twice.
He scored a 72 on the MCAT, while many minority students scored lower and gained acceptance.
The University of California Davis School of Medicine used quotas to ensure diversity.
It set aside sixteen out of one hundred spots for minority students.
Therefore, several students were denied, that were more than qualified, simply because of their race.
When I was learned about this case in AP Government, it seemed like an open and shut case with the information I was provided.
The Supreme Court of California ruled that the Davis School of Medicine admissions program violated the constitutional rights of white applicants.
The judges ordered that Bakke be admitted to the medical school.
However, after further research, the case became more complex in my eyes.
I find it interesting that I was not presented with all of the information in my prominently white high school.
Although Bakke was qualified for the medical program, he applied late because his mother-in-law was ill.
He was also 33 years old, well above the norm age for entering medical school.
He had several interviews with the university, with recommendations ranging from admission to rejection, due to his insensitive mindset.
All of these factors may have led to his rejection, rather than the simple issue of Bakke’s race.
In 1978, the case was appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States.
The court turned over the previous ruling, stating that race can be one of the factors considered in admission, but declared that using specific quotas was unconstitutional.
Due to a plurality opinion, Bakke was admitted acceptance, based on the fact that the University of California went too far in enforcing affirmative action.
Bakke even went so far as to sue the University for legal fees.
In the end, he received over $150,000 and attended the Davis School of Medicine, despite his highly publicized court case.
Bakke
Because the ruling was based on a plurality opinion, meaning the court did not come to one unanimous decision, it was unclear whether a precedent for affirmative action was set.
Therefore, the roll of affirmative action in admission to higher education programs went unchanged.
It was not until a 2003 Supreme Court Case, Grutter v. Bollinger, that the court set a precedent regarding affirmative action.
I will discuss this case in a later blog.
After I researched this case further in depth, it split my opinion on affirmative action even more.
As I said before, in high school this case provided me with evidence to form my opinion that affirmative action is unconstitutional.
However, now I am not so sure.
It has become clear that race was not considered as the only factor, and many other components played a role in Bakke’s rejection from the University of California Davis School of Medicine.