Regents of the University of California v. Bakke

The Supreme Court Case, the University of California v. Bakke, serves a landmark trial that forever changed the legal landscape in America. The case began when Allan Bakke applied to the University of California Davis school of Medicine on two separate occasions. The applications were delivered to the school in 1973 and 1974.
On the application, Bakke stated that he was a Caucasian male. Bakke was ultimately rejected both times. 
After conducting his own research, Bakke discovered that other applicants, who were accepted to the school, had lower scores than he did. Bakke believed that these individuals were accepted because they stated “minority status” on their respective applications. Bakke also discovered that students who were poorer than he was had a better chance of getting accepted even when his grades were better.  
Bakke was very upset that he was rejected when students with worse scores were accepted. He was so upset, in fact, that he filed a lawsuit against the University of California. He filed the suit because he felt that the school was unfairly accepting students based on their race and poverty level. He claimed that the School had violated his 14th Amendment rights, which are awarded to all American citizens. 
He also claimed that the school was violating Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which states that no ethnic or racial advantages should be granted to a particular group by any academic institution or program that receives government money. Bakke claimed that he was being discriminated against because he kept getting rejected. 
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke: The Case Profile
The Regents of the University of California v. Bakke case took place on October 8, 1977. Bakke filed the suit, claiming the University was guilty of unfairly treating him because of his race. The Regents of the University of California v. Bakke was heard by the Supreme Court of the United States and decided on June 28th of 1978. 
The Regents of the University of California v. Bakke: The Verdict
The United States Supreme Court in the Regents of the University of California v. Bakke case ruled in favor of Bakke. The Court found that the University of California was guilty of violating both the 14th Amendment and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.