Apr
MAY
Jun
23
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
23 May 16 - 23 May 16
Close Help
Erstellen Erkunden Lernen & Support
Loslegen
Anmelden
Preise
Loslegen
Anmelden
Meine Prezis Erkunden Lernen & Support
Produkt Unternehmen Karriere Support Community Kontakt Apps
English Español 한국어 日本語 Deutsch Português Français Magyar Italiano
×
Houston, wir haben ein Problem!
Hoppla. Eine Firewall blockiert den Zugriff auf Prezi-Inhalte. Lesen Sie diesen Artikel , um mehr darüber zu erfahren, oder kontaktieren Sie Ihren System-Administrator.
Einprägsam aus der Masse hervorstechen - mit Prezi,
der Geheimwaffe für filmreifes Präsentieren.
Heute starten
Loslegen
Was ist Prezi? Mehr erfahren
Lädt Präsentation...
Öffentlich
Teilen Einbetten Liked Like
Fernpräsentation
Senden Sie den Link unten via E-Mail oder PN
Kopieren
Präsentieren Sie für Ihr Publikum
Fernpräsentation beginnen
Eingeladene Zuschauer werden Ihnen folgen, während Sie navigieren und präsentieren
Zu dieser Präsentation eingeladene Personen benötigen kein Prezi-Konto
Dieser Link verfällt 10 Minuten, nachdem Sie die Präsentation schließen
Maximal 30 Nutzer können Ihrer Präsentation folgen
Erfahren Sie in unserer Wissensdatenbank mehr über diese Funktion
Möchten Sie diese Prezi wirklich löschen?
Weder Sie, noch die Personen, mit denen Sie diese Prezi geteilt haben, können die Prezi dann wiederherstellen.
Löschen Abbrechen
Möchten Sie Ihre "Likes" auf Facebook sichtbar machen?
Verbinden Sie Ihr Facebook-Konto mit Prezi und lassen Sie Ihre "Likes" in Ihrer Chronik erscheinen.
Sie können dies jederzeit unter Einstellungen & Konto ändern.
Nein danke
Mit Facebook verbinden
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
Keine Beschreibung
von
ege akıncı
am 30. Oktober 2014
Twittern
Kommentare (0)
Bitte anmelden , um Ihren Kommentar hinzuzufügen.
Missbrauch melden
Transkript von Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
Issue(s)
Did the University of California violate the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection clause by holding an affirmative action policy that kept Allan Bakke out the medical school?
Can race be considered as a factor in the admissions process?
Brief Fact Summary
The Respondent,
Allan Bakke
, a white applicant to the University of California, Davis Medical School, sued the University, alleging his denial of admission on racial grounds was a violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution.
The University of California, Davis Medical School
reserved 16 spots out of the 100 in any given class for “disadvantaged minorities.” The Respondent, when compared to students admitted under
the affirmative action
program, had more favorable objective indicia of performance, while his race was the only distinguishing characteristic. The Respondent sued, alleging that the affirmative action program denied him equal protection of laws under the Fourteenth Amendment of the Constitution.
Affirmative Action
The process of a business or governmental agency in which it gives special rights of hiring or advancement to ethnic minorities to make up for past discrimination against that minority. Affirmative action has been the subject of legal battles on the basis that it is reverse discrimination against Caucasians, but in most challenges to affirmative action the programs have been upheld.
Conclusion
Significance of the Case
Decision & Legal Reasoning
Prepared by:
Ege Akıncı
Bahadır Çeliktaş
Emre Ekmekçi
Thanks!
Winner!
The Supreme Court’s decision in Bakke was announced on June 28, 1978
5 votes for Bakke,4 votes against
Justice Powell
’s opinion is the controlling opinion of the Court
The supreme court agreed that the university’s use of strict racial quotas was unconstitutional
Powell wrote that the use of race should be subject to
“strict scrutiny”
meaning that there should be a compelling governmental interest in using race
Strict scrutiny is a form of judicial review that courts use to determine the constitutionality of certain laws.
Strict Scrutiny:
Because the special admissions program involved in a racial classification, the supreme court [of California] held itself bound to apply strict scrutiny. It then turned to the goals the University presented as justifying the special program.
The California court held that the Equal Protection Clause required that "no applicant may be rejected because of his race, in favor of another who is less qualified, as measured by standards applied without regard to race."
The decision of the case lead to a change in the acceptation process of the Universities.
Starting from the decision of the supreme court for Allen Bakke, racial classification is no longer the only criteria to accept admissions. race is only one of the facts of the criteria.
The Bakke case resulted in the ruling that affirmative action -is- constitutional, but that it can not use a "quota system" based on race.
''The Supreme Court decision actually encouraged affirmative action goals by allowing the use of race and other determinants in academic achievement as acceptable admissions criteria,'' Dr. Robert G. Petersdorf, president of the Association of American Medical Colleges,
''Bakke was significant because it didn't put the brakes on affirmative action,'' said Rennard Strickland, dean of the Southern Illinois University Law School
Komplettes Transkript
Weitere Präsentationen von ege akıncı
Federative Republic of Brazil
Beliebte Präsentationen
Weitere beliebte oder die neuesten Prezis ansehen
Produkt Unternehmen Karriere Support Community Kontakt Apps
English
español
한국어
日本語
Deutsch
Português
français
Magyar
italiano
© 2016 Prezi Inc.  Nutzungsbedingungen
<p>Verbinden Sie Ihr Facebook-Konto mit Prezi und veröffentlichen Sie in der Zukunft Ihre "Likes".</p><form class="bypass" method="post" action="/web/20160523115555/https://prezi.com/associate/facebook/"><input type='hidden' name='csrfmiddlewaretoken' value='EPjj9qMI6S7XqqtWSCtgp1IbYePxSwk0' /><input type="hidden" name="next" value="/vhfcsmdvlv0t/og-like/"><p class="clearfix"><button type="submit" class="btn btn-primary" id="fb-connect-like-ok-btn">OK</button><a class="btn pull-right" onclick="closeOverlay();return false;" href="javascript:void(0);">Nein danke</a></p></form>