Apr
MAY
Jun
26
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
26 May 16 - 26 May 16
Close Help
RCL
Just another weblog
Widgets
Search
Skip to content
Search for:
Recent Posts
The End
Affirmative action is okay…as long as it’s not too affirmative….or too active.
A White Horse With Black Stripes
Affirmative Action: Is There a Middle Ground?
Shop ‘Til You Drop
Recent Comments
Shreya Bhatt on Affirmative action is okay…as long as it’s not too affirmative….or too active.
Marin Nagelberg on Affirmative action is okay…as long as it’s not too affirmative….or too active.
Jacob Dawes on Affirmative action is okay…as long as it’s not too affirmative….or too active.
Andy Murtha on Affirmative action is okay…as long as it’s not too affirmative….or too active.
Yu Zhang on Affirmative action is okay…as long as it’s not too affirmative….or too active.
Archives
April 2016
March 2016
February 2016
January 2016
October 2015
September 2015
Categories
Uncategorized
Meta
Log in
Entries RSS
Comments RSS
WordPress.org
Banksy
Banksy
Search for:
Regents of the University of California v.Bakke
February 10, 2016
Callie Freenock
In order to understand the role of affirmative action in today’s society, we must first understand the history of affirmative action. The first publicized Supreme Court case that challenged affirmative action was the Regents of the University of California v. Bakke. Allan P. Bakke was rejected from the Davis School of Medicine, twice. He scored a 72 on the MCAT, while many minority students scored lower and gained acceptance. The University of California Davis School of Medicine used quotas to ensure diversity. It set aside sixteen out of one hundred spots for minority students. Therefore, several students were denied, that were more than qualified, simply because of their race. When I was learned about this case in AP Government, it seemed like an open and shut case with the information I was provided. The Supreme Court of California ruled that the Davis School of Medicine admissions program violated the constitutional rights of white applicants. The judges ordered that Bakke be admitted to the medical school.
However, after further research, the case became more complex in my eyes. I find it interesting that I was not presented with all of the information in my prominently white high school. Although Bakke was qualified for the medical program, he applied late because his mother-in-law was ill. He was also 33 years old, well above the norm age for entering medical school. He had several interviews with the university, with recommendations ranging from admission to rejection, due to his insensitive mindset. All of these factors may have led to his rejection, rather than the simple issue of Bakke’s race.
In 1978, the case was appealed to the Supreme Court of the United States. The court turned over the previous ruling, stating that race can be one of the factors considered in admission, but declared that using specific quotas was unconstitutional. Due to a plurality opinion, Bakke was admitted acceptance, based on the fact that the University of California went too far in enforcing affirmative action. Bakke even went so far as to sue the University for legal fees. In the end, he received over $150,000 and attended the Davis School of Medicine, despite his highly publicized court case.
Because the ruling was based on a plurality opinion, meaning the court did not come to one unanimous decision, it was unclear whether a precedent for affirmative action was set. Therefore, the roll of affirmative action in admission to higher education programs went unchanged. It was not until a 2003 Supreme Court Case, Grutter v. Bollinger, that the court set a precedent regarding affirmative action. I will discuss this case in a later blog.
After I researched this case further in depth, it split my opinion on affirmative action even more. As I said before, in high school this case provided me with evidence to form my opinion that affirmative action is unconstitutional. However, now I am not so sure. It has become clear that race was not considered as the only factor, and many other components played a role in Bakke’s rejection from the University of California Davis School of Medicine.
miles26 milespolitics
Post navigation
←
→
One thought on “Regents of the University of California v.Bakke”
Shreya Bhatt
says:
I find it so interesting the way only half the story is publicized while the other details presenting the other side of the story are hidden away and left in the hands of those who are willing to further research the topic. I feel like this case really questions whether affirmative action is labeled correctly or if there are always other factors that question whether discrimination was even a major part of the story. Awesome post!
February 11, 2016 at 1:43 pm
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
You must be logged in to post a comment.
Proudly powered by WordPress | Theme: Fictive by WordPress.com .
Skip to toolbar
Sites at Penn State
Log in
Search