APR
MAY
Jun
26
2015
2016
2017
7 captures
27 Jun 15 - 26 May 16
Close Help
Blog
Donate
Calendar
Contact
Buy Tickets
About
Visit
Learn
Debate
Explore the Constitution
Experience the Museum
Constitution Daily
Smart conversation from the National Constitution Center
Blog Home
Read The Constitution
Recent Stories
The Court
Podcasts
Video
When the Supreme Court first ruled on affirmative action
June 26, 2015
by Will Field
Share:
Email
Protest against the California Supreme Court’s decision in Bakke, Los Angeles, May 7, 1977
On June 26, 1978, the Supreme Court ruled in Regents of the University of California v. Bakke .
The fractured court came to a mixed decision on the issue of racial preferences in university admissions, laying the groundwork for educational standards that still exist today.
The Bakke story stretches back to Brown v. Board of Education (1954) and the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which desegregated schools and outlawed discrimination on the basis of race.
Although Congress officially ended segregation, there was reluctance to actually integrate schools, and a disparity in college-preparedness remained between whites and blacks.
Thus, colleges like the University of California, Davis School of Medicine adopted policies of racial favoritism, policies designed to compensate for unfair disadvantages.
Specifically, the school established a program to designate 16 of the 100 spots in each class for minority students.
Allan Bakke, a white male in his thirties, twice applied for admission at the school but was rejected, partially because of his advanced age.
Bakke’s interviewer considered him “a very desirable candidate”; his GPA was comparable to other admittees and his MCAT scores were all significantly greater.
Compared to the special admittees of UC Davis’s affirmative action program, he beat every student in every metric in both of his application classes.
Bakke, exasperated by the rejections, filed suit, contending that the University of California violated the equal protection guarantee of the Fourteenth Amendment and the Civil Rights Act.
Ironically, he argued, a law that was passed to promote equality was being employed for the opposite purpose.
The case rose through federal courts to reach the Supreme Court of California, which struck down the admissions policy and ordered Bakke’s admission.
Shocked at the surprise judgment from a traditionally liberal court, the frustrated university requested a stay of admission.
Shortly thereafter, the U.S. Supreme Court accepted the case for its October 1977 term.
National interest in the case was enormous—58 amicus briefs were filed, setting a Court record until 1989, and reflecting the many and diverse arguments on the issue.
Ultimately, the Court was mixed in its decision: six different Justices wrote opinions on the case, with Justice Lewis Powell writing the controlling opinion and virtually splitting his vote between two groups of four Justices.
Affirming the lower court, Powell and four of his colleagues determined that specific racial quotas in university admissions are unconstitutional.
In Powell’s words, “The fatal flaw in … [UC’s] preferential program is its disregard of individual rights as guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment.”
The majority argued that, by explicitly differentiating racial groups for consideration, the university violated the Constitution’s guarantee of equal protection under the law.
It was unfair, they said, that minorities were eligible for 100 spots in the class when whites could only vie for 84.
Thus, the Court struck down racial quotas and ordered Bakke admitted.
Yet Powell also joined the remaining four Justices in affirming the legality of a program that considered racial background as one of many holistic factors in admissions decision.
In his view, such a policy did not specifically exclude anyone from admission.
Discussing a Harvard race-awareness program, Powell argued that even though “race or ethnic background may be deemed a ‘plus’ in a particular applicant’s file … it does not insulate the individual from comparison with all other candidates for the available seats.”
With each applicant considered for an array of qualities, someone like Bakke would not be “foreclosed from all consideration from [a] seat simply because he was not the right color or had the wrong surname.”
Twenty-five years later, in the landmark case of Grutter v. Bollinger  (2003), the Supreme Court affirmed its decision in Bakke by ruling that the University of Michigan Law School’s race-conscious admissions policy was constitutional because it did not involve the use of explicit quotas.
But Bakke remains fundamental precedent on affirmative action.
Will Field is an intern at the National Constitution Center.
Recent Stories on Constitution Daily
Supreme Court Scorecard (Updated June 26): The big decisions due this month
Supreme Court recognizes national right to same-sex marriage
Podcast: Analyzing the Obamacare Supreme Court decision
Share:
Email
Comments
comments
Filed Under: 14th Amendment , Civic Calendar , Civil Rights , Education , Supreme Court
Podcast: Felons and the right to vote
Roger Clegg of the Center for Equal Opportunity and Erika Wood of New York Law School debate whether voting rights should be restored for people with past criminal convictions.
Download this episode (right click and save)
Recent Podcasts
Podcast: Felons and the right to vote
Podcast: Marijuana and the Constitution
Podcast: Debating the laws regulating bathroom use and gender
Listen To More Podcasts
Recent Videos
Video: The Presidents And the Constitution
Video: Korematsu, Japanese internment and America today
Video: The history and legacy of the 14th Amendment
Watch More Videos
About The National Constitution Center
The National Constitution Center in Philadelphia inspires active citizenship as the only place where people across America and around the world can come together to learn about, debate, and celebrate the greatest vision of human freedom in history, the U.S. Constitution.
Learn more at constitutioncenter.org
Contact Us
Contact The Blog
Media inquiries
Terms Of Use
Privacy Policy
Terms & Conditions
Comment Policy
Interactive Constitution
Search and browse by article, amendment or issue.
Get RSS Feeds
Podcasts
All Stories
Video
Civic Calendar
Subscribe By E-Mail
Sign up for Constitution Daily's email newsletter
Get email updates about the National Constitution Center
Main Web Site
Go To Main Web Site
Exhibits
Education
Town Hall Programs
Plan Your Visit
Copyright © 2016 · The National Constitution Center
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.