APR
MAY
Jun
23
2015
2016
2017
25 captures
16 Jan 12 - 23 May 16
Close Help
Laws
Lawyers
Find Laws
Legal Forms
State Laws
Kids
Federalist Papers
Bill of Rights
Constitution 
Article 1
Article 2
Article 3
Article 4
Article 5
Article 6
Article 7
Declaration of Independence
Founding Fathers 
Alexander Hamilton
Benjamin Harrison
James Wilson
Thomas Jefferson
Benjamin Franklin
George Washington
James Madison
John Adams
John Hancock
John Witherspoon
Patrick Henry
Robert Morris
Roger Sherman
Samuel Adams
Thomas Nelson
Thomas Paine
William Paterson
Civil Rights
Constitution
Preamble
We The People
The First Amendment to The Fifteenth Amendment
First Amendment
Second Amendment
Third Amendment
Third Amendment
Fourth Amendment
Fifth Amendment
Sixth Amendment
Seventh Amendment
Eighth Amendment
Ninth Amendment
Tenth Amendment
Eleventh Amendment
Twelfth Amendment
Thirteenth Amendment
Fourteenth Amendment
Fifteenth Amendment
The Sixteenth Amendment To The Twenty Seventh Amendment
Sixteenth Amendment
Seventeenth Amendment
Eighteenth Amendment
Nineteenth Amendment
Twentieth Amendment
Twenty First Amendment
Twenty Second Amendment
Twenty Third Amendment
Twenty Fourth Amendment
Twenty Fifth Amendment
Twenty Sixth Amendment
Twenty Seventh Amendment
Famous Cases
Bush v. Gore
Cherokee Nation v. Georgia
Dred Scott vs. Sanford
Escobedo v. Illinois
Furman v. Georgia
Gitlow v. New York
Gregg v. Georgia
Griswold v. Connecticut
Grutter v. Bollinger
Hamdi v. Rumsfeld
Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier
Katz v. United States
Korematsu v. United States
Lawrence v. Texas
Lemon v. Kurtzman
Lochner v. New York
Loving v. Virginia
Marbury v. Madison
McCulloch v. Maryland
Miller v. California
Miranda v. Arizona
Near v. Minnesota
Perry v. Schwarzenegger
Powell v. Alabama
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
Roper v. Simmons
Schenck v. United States
Terry v. Ohio
Texas v. Johnson
Tinker v. Des Moines
United States v. Lopez
Worcester v. Georgia
World Trade Center Bombing
Share 0  Share 0  Tweet 0  +1 0  Share
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
Back To Homepage Subscribe To RSS Feed
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
Share Share 0  Tweet 0  +1 0  Share 0 
The Supreme Court Case, the University of California v. Bakke, serves a landmark trial that forever changed the legal landscape in America. The case began when Allan Bakke applied to the University of California Davis school of Medicine on two separate occasions. The applications were delivered to the school in 1973 and 1974.
On the application, Bakke stated that he was a Caucasian male. Bakke was ultimately rejected both times. 
After conducting his own research, Bakke discovered that other applicants, who were accepted to the school, had lower scores than he did. Bakke believed that these individuals were accepted because they stated “minority status” on their respective applications. Bakke also discovered that students who were poorer than he was had a better chance of getting accepted even when his grades were better.  
Bakke was very upset that he was rejected when students with worse scores were accepted. He was so upset, in fact, that he filed a lawsuit against the University of California. He filed the suit because he felt that the school was unfairly accepting students based on their race and poverty level. He claimed that the School had violated his 14th Amendment rights, which are awarded to all American citizens. 
He also claimed that the school was violating Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which states that no ethnic or racial advantages should be granted to a particular group by any academic institution or program that receives government money. Bakke claimed that he was being discriminated against because he kept getting rejected. 
Regents of the University of California v. Bakke: The Case Profile
The Regents of the University of California v. Bakke case took place on October 8, 1977. Bakke filed the suit, claiming the University was guilty of unfairly treating him because of his race. The Regents of the University of California v. Bakke was heard by the Supreme Court of the United States and decided on June 28th of 1978. 
The Regents of the University of California v. Bakke: The Verdict
The United States Supreme Court in the Regents of the University of California v. Bakke case ruled in favor of Bakke. The Court found that the University of California was guilty of violating both the 14th Amendment and Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Comments
comments
No related posts.
Share Share 0  Tweet 0  +1 0  Share 0 
Related Articles
Scroll Back To Top
George Washington
Thomas Jefferson
Thomas Nelson
Search for:
Popular In Kids
Preamble Of The Constitution Worcester V Georgia 14th Amendment Gregg V Georgia Miller V California 19th Amendment Escobedo V Illinois Gitlow V New York Roper V Simmons 17th Amendment Lemon V Kurtzman 25th Amendment
Contact Us
Lawyer Marketing
Advertise on Laws.com
About Us
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Advertising Policy
Disclaimer
There is no confidential attorney-client relationship formed by using Laws.com website and information provided on this site is not legal advice. For legal advice, please contact your attorney. Attorneys listed on this website are not referred or endorsed by this website. By using Laws.com you agree to Laws.com Terms Of Use.
Copyright © 2015 Laws.com | All rights reserved
Loading..
Close Window
Loading, Please Wait!
This may take a second or two.
Read previous post:
Benjamin Harrison
Close