APR
MAY
Jun
23
2015
2016
2017
7 captures
24 Jan 16 - 23 May 16
Close Help
One moment...
Sign in
Shopping Cart                 ()
1 item added to your cart
Order Total
$0.00
Continue Shopping Checkout
Home
About
Cases
Brown v. Board of Education
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Gibbons v. Ogden
Gideon v. Wainwright
Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier
Korematsu v. United States
Mapp v. Ohio
Marbury v. Madison
McCulloch v. Maryland
Miranda v. Arizona
New Jersey v. T.L.O.
Plessy v. Ferguson
Regents of the U. of California v. Bakke
Roe v. Wade
Texas v. Johnson
Tinker v. Des Moines
United States v. Nixon
Teaching Strategies
Case Study
Moot Court
Role Play
Continuum
Community Resources
Evaluating Web Sites
Political Cartoon Analysis
Scored Discussion
WebQuest
Legislative Simulation
Classifying Arguments
Jigsaw
Fish Bowl Tag Discussion
Legal Concepts
Street Law, Inc. and The Supreme Court Historical Society present
Landmark Cases of the U.S. Supreme Court
Street Law / Landmark Cases / Cases / Regents of the U. of California v. Bakke
Regents of the U. of California v. Bakke (1978)
Affirmative Action, Equal Protection
" . . . Race or ethnic background may be deemed a "plus" in a particular applicant's file, yet it does not insulate the individual from comparison with all other candidates for the available seats." — Justice Powell, Speaking for the Court
In the early 1970s, the medical school of the University of California at Davis devised a dual admissions program to increase representation of disadvantaged minority students. Allan Bakke was a white male who applied to and was rejected from the regular admissions program, while minority applicants with lower grade point averages and testing scores were admitted under the specialty admissions program. Bakke filed suit, alleging that this admissions system violated the Equal Protection Clause and excluded him on the basis of race. The Supreme Court found for Bakke against the rigid use of racial quotas, but also established that race was a permissible criteria among several others.
Learn more
About the materials
These materials were developed for students of various skill levels, and teachers should choose the level that works best for their students.  Answers to the background questions, vocabulary, and activities can be found in the FOR TEACHERS ONLY tab under each case.
Background summary and questions to consider (by reading level)
•••
••
•
Important vocabulary (by reading level)
•••/•• 
•
Legal Concepts
Equal Protection
Other useful background information
Diagram of how the case moved through the court system
Activities*
The Case
You Decide: Who Should Be Admitted?  
Classifying Arguments in the Case
A Comparison of the University of California at Davis' Admissions System
to That of Harvard
Understanding the Decision (•)
After the Case
The Court Revisits Bakke 25 Years Later: The Michigan Affirmative Action Cases
Drawing Mixed Reactions: Political Cartoons in Response to the Michigan Affirmative Action Cases
* Answers to the background questions, vocabulary, and activities can be found in the FOR TEACHERS ONLY tab under each case.
Teaching strategies used
Classifying Arguments
Scored Discussion
Political Cartoon Analysis
Planning time and activities
If you have one day . . .
 
As an introduction to the case, have the students complete • ) and answer the questions.
For homework, have students read the  Key Excerpts of the Majority Opinion  and answer the accompanying questions.
If you have two days . . .
Complete all activities for the first day.
On the second day, briefly discuss students' responses to the homework questions.
Have students complete Comparing UC's admissions to Harvard's .
If you have three days . . .
Complete all activities suggested for the first and second days.
Have students complete Drawing Mixed Reactions: Political Cartoons in Response to the Michigan Affirmative Action Cases .
If you have four days . . .
Complete all of the activities suggested for the first, second and third days.
Have students read and react to the following selection: An Ode to Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr.: The Supreme Court Approves The Consideration of Race as a Factor in Admissions by Public Institutions of Higher Education (from Duke Law's Supreme Court Online).
In a follow-up discussion, focus on the following: "Justice O'Connor expressed the hope that twenty-five years from now race-conscious admissions will not be necessary." Do you agree or disagree?
Explain to students that although the Michigan affirmative action cases held that certain forms of affirmative action policies are permissible under the Fourteenth Amendment, the Constitution does not compel the use of race as a factor in admissions to promote diversity. Prior to the Michigan cases, several states had moved toward race-neutral admissions policies. Have students examine the article 'Race-Neutral' University Admissions in Spotlight (from the LA Times) and consider reasons for the problems that race neutral policies have encountered. Ask students: Are there alternatives to affirmative action admissions policies that may promote diversity in higher education? If so, what are they?
Key excerpts from the opinion
Summary of the decision
Full text of the opinion (external link)
Recommended resources
Listen to the oral arguments (Oyez)
Background Information on Affirmative Action (NCSL)
Split Decision on Affirmative Action  (MSNBC)
An Ode to Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr.: The Supreme Court Approves the Consideration if Race as a Factor in Admissions by Public Institutions of Higher Education (Duke Law)
For Teachers Only
This section contains answers and tips for differentiated instruction for select activities. To gain access, simply sign in.
Sign in
If you are new to LandmarkCases.org and don't already have an account, please create one. You will then complete your registration by filling out a brief registration form.
Create an account
Contact: If you have questions/problems registering or accessing the teacher only materials, please contact us at landmarkcases@streetlaw.org . 
Cases
Brown v. Board of Education
Dred Scott v. Sandford
Gibbons v. Ogden
Gideon v. Wainwright
Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier
Korematsu v. United States
Mapp v. Ohio
Marbury v. Madison
McCulloch v. Maryland
Miranda v. Arizona
New Jersey v. T.L.O.
Plessy v. Ferguson
Regents of the U. of California v. Bakke
Roe v. Wade
Texas v. Johnson
Tinker v. Des Moines
United States v. Nixon
Share this page!
Print
Facebook
Twitter
LinkedIn
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use