APR
MAY
Jun
23
2015
2016
2017
12 captures
27 Jun 15 - 23 May 16
Close Help
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
Bakke decision
Article
Web sites
Law case
Read
View History
Edit
Feedback
Alternative title: Regents of the University of California v. Bakke
Bakke decision, formally Regents of the University of California v. Bakke,  ruling in which, on June 28, 1978, the U.S. Supreme Court declared affirmative action constitutional but invalidated the use of racial quotas.
The medical school at the University of California , Davis , as part of the university’s affirmative action program, had reserved 16 percent of its admission places for minority applicants.
Allan Bakke, a white California man who had twice unsuccessfully applied for admission to the medical school, filed suit against the university.
Citing evidence that his grades and test scores surpassed those of many minority students who had been accepted for admission, Bakke charged that he had suffered unfair “reverse discrimination” on the basis of race, which he argued was contrary to the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the equal protection clause of the U.S. Constitution’s Fourteenth Amendment .
The Supreme Court, in a highly fractured ruling (six separate opinions were issued), agreed that the university’s use of strict racial quotas was unconstitutional and ordered that the medical school admit Bakke, but it also contended that race could be used as one criterion in the admissions decisions of institutions of higher education.
Although the ruling legalized the use of affirmative action, in subsequent decisions during the next several decades the court limited the scope of such programs, and several U.S. states prohibited affirmative action programs based on race.
Share
Share:
Email
Print
Cite
Feedback
Corrections?
Updates?
Help us improve this article!
Contact our editors with your Feedback .
To propose your own edits, go to Edit Mode .
You may also be interested in...
O. J. Simpson trial
Roe v. Wade
Ronald Reagan
Plessy v. Ferguson
University of California
John C. Frémont
Earl Warren
Marbury v. Madison
Stanford University
Buckley v. Valeo
Los Angeles 1984 Olympic Games
McCutcheon v. Federal Election Commission
Keep exploring
All-American History Quiz
American History and Politics
History Buff Quiz
7 Alphabet Soup Agencies that Stuck Around
11 Memorable Quotes from U.S. Presidential Debates
Email this page
Cancel
Send
Britannica Stories
In The News / Science
Tsunamis on Mars
Demystified / Food
What's the Difference Between Sweet Potatoes and Yams?
Spotlight / Society
Celebrating Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders
See All Stories
BRITANNICA QUIZZES
Geography of India
Bauhaus
Fishes vs. Mammals
See More Quizzes
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
©2016 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Citations
MLA style:
"Bakke decision".
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016.
Web.
23 Mai.
2016
<http://www.britannica.com/event/Bakke-decision>.
APA style:
Bakke decision.
(2016).
In Encyclopædia Britannica.
Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/event/Bakke-decision
Harvard style:
Bakke decision.
2016.
Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Retrieved 23 Mai, 2016, from http://www.britannica.com/event/Bakke-decision
Chicago Manual of Style:
Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "Bakke decision", accessed Mai 23, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/event/Bakke-decision.
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Update
Link
Click anywhere inside the article to add text or insert superscripts, subscripts, and special characters.
You can also highlight a section and use the tools in this bar to modify existing content:
Add links to related Britannica articles!
You can double-click any word or highlight a word or phrase in the text below and then select an article from the search box.
Or, simply highlight a word or phrase in the article, then enter the article name or term you'd like to link to in the search box below, and select from the list of results.
Note: we do not allow links to external resources in editor.
Please click the Web sites link for this article to add citations for
external Web sites.
Editing Tools:
Tips for Editing
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles.
You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind:
Encyclopaedia Britannica articles are written in a neutral, objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context.
(Internet URLs are best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval.
Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
MEDIA FOR:
Bakke decision
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email.
Try again later.
×