In 1968, Secret Service protection was not offered to presidential candidates, so none were present.
Neither LAPD or L.A. County Sheriffs officers were there either.
Only one of the individuals that was acting as a bodyguard for Robert Kennedy that evening was armed.
The weapon he carried was a .38 Special.
The bullets that struck Kennedy and the others wounded that night were from a .22, which is exactly what Sirhan Sirhan was carrying.
So, the answer to your question is "No, he was not killed in some sort of crossfire between bodyguards and assassin."
The audiotape simply re-raises the question that was asked in 1968: Was there a second gunman?
The LAPD investigation ruled that out, though some eyewitness statements and such seemed to run contrary to that.
The L.A. County Coroner, Thomas Noguchi, sort of waffled on the subject because the forensics didn't exactly support Sirhan being able to fire the fatal shot from where he was standing in connection with Kennedy.
Noguchi stated some years after the RFK assassination: "Until more is precisely known, the existence of a second gunman remains a possibility.
Thus, I have never said that Sirhan Sirhan killed Robert Kennedy."
There is no doubt that Sirhan wished to kill Kennedy.
Evidence at his home, specifically handwritten notes stated: "My determination to eliminate RFK is becoming more and more of an unshakable obsession.
RFK must die.
RFK must be killed.
Robert F. Kennedy must be assassinated.
Robert F. Kennedy must be assassinated before 5 June 1968".
There is also no doubt that Sirhan was there that night, with a gun, and that he clearly fired it at Kennedy.
Unfortunately, much of the forensic evidence from the scene of the assassination has been destroyed or is missing.
Given that fact, it is unlikely a definitive determination could now be made as to whether a second gunman was present or not.
Make no mistake though, Sirhan Sirhan shot Robert F. Kennedy on June 5, 1968.
With or without help in doing it, he is still a guilty man.