Collection Guide: http://www.oac.cdlib.org/findaid/ark:/13030/kt2j49r8f6
Collection Title:Collection Number:Get Items:
Inventory of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department Records - Sirhan Sirhan Case File
96-03-17
Collection Overview
Description  The Los Angeles Sheriff's Department records - Sirhan Sirhan case file contains twelve cubic feet of textual and photographic records covering the period of his confinement by the Sheriff's Department following the assassination of Senator Robert F. Kennedy in 1968.
The materials consist of two groups of records, the Sheriff's Department office files and a partial transcript of the proceedings during Sirhan Sirhan's trial.
Background  In the early hours of June 5, 1968, New York Senator Robert F. Kennedy addressed a crowd of his supporters at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles.
Senator Kennedy, a candidate for President of the United States, had just won the California Democratic Primary.
Winning the California primary was critical to his quest for the Democratic Party nomination.
Senator Kennedy concluded his victory speech and then stepped from the stage and proceeded to walk through a kitchen pantry area of the hotel, shaking hands with some of the people who had gathered to see him.
Shots were fired and Senator Kennedy and five other people were wounded in the shooting.
Senator Kennedy died the next day as a result of his wounds.
Extent  12 cubic feet of textual and photographic records
Restrictions  For permission to reproduce or publish, please contact the California State Archives.
Permission for reproduction or publication is given on behalf of the California State Archives as the owner of the physical items.
The researcher assumes all responsibility for possible infringement which may arise from reproduction or publication of materials from the California State Archives collections.
Availability  Every effort has been made to provide the fullest possible disclosure of the records.
In the few places where restrictions are noted, the justification is firmly rooted in California statutory law.
The specific statutory restrictions are as follows: