MAR
MAR
Apr
16
2010
2016
2017
2 captures
23 Mar 10 - 16 Mar 16
Close Help
 
City-Data Forum > General Forums > History
Bobby Kennedy - Accidentally Shot? (facts, Washington, JFK, state)
User Name
Remember Me
Password
 [ Register ]
Please register to participate in our discussions with 1.5 million other members - it's free and quick! Some forums can only be seen by registered members. After you create your account , you'll be able to customize options and access all our 15,000 new posts/day with fewer ads.
View detailed profile ( Advanced ) or search
site with
Search Forums  ( Advanced )
 
Page 1 of 4
1
2
3
4
>
 
04-10-2008, 12:51 AM
RABBI JOE
 
Location: New Jersey
316 posts, read 438,446 times
Reputation: 68
Advertisements
I read about - and then saw the times history video on the newly uncovered and digitaly mastered audio tapes - the only one that actually recorded Bobby Kennedy's assassination. The new computerized software was able to detect 13 gunshots - 5 more bullets then Sirhan's gun was able to hold...
The following is from Wikipedia:
Quote:
Robert F. Kennedy assassination - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Pruszynski recording
Decades later, it was discovered that the shots in the kitchen pantry had been recorded on audio tape by Stanislaw Pruszynski , a freelance newspaper reporter who was covering Senator Kennedy's presidential campaign for the Montreal Gazette and today resides in his native Poland [10] . Pruszynski had made the recording with a battery-powered portable cassette tape recorder and an attached microphone. Pruszynski's tape has become the only known sound recording of the Robert F. Kennedy assassination and analysis of it has only just begun. On February 21, 2008, scientific results that conclude the recording reveals a second gun in the assassination were presented at the American Academy of Forensic Sciences annual meeting in Washington DC for further study and peer review. [11]
On June 6 , 2007 , the newly-discovered Pruszynski recording was the centerpiece for a television program about the Kennedy case on Discovery Times Channel, now known as Investigation Discovery Channel. The one-hour documentary, entitled Conspiracy Test: The RFK Assassination, [12] [13] provided evidence from the recording that convicted gunman Sirhan Sirhan had not acted alone. Pruszynski's audio tape, which had never been broadcast in the 39 years since the murder, was aired for the first time during the Discovery Times program. According to three out of four audio experts interviewed for the documentary, the reporter's recording shows that a second gun was fired in the Bobby Kennedy shooting.
Stanislaw Pruszynski and his recording equipment were approximately 40 feet southwest of Senator Kennedy when the shots erupted inside the Ambassador Hotel kitchen pantry. Pruszynski was unaware that his portable machine was still operating as it captured the sounds of the Kennedy shooting. Pruszynski also was unaware of the shooting itself because it was taking place amidst the various sounds of celebration, some distance away inside another room and outside the reporter's purview.
At that moment, Pruszynski was about to enter a narrow back corridor leading into the pantry from the hotel’s Embassy Room, a ballroom where Kennedy had just delivered his victory statement following the Tuesday, June 4 California Democratic primary election. When the shooting commenced, Pruszynski was at the north side of the ballroom and descending a small set of steps at the east end of the ballroom's makeshift stage where the Senator had spoken. Although he did not know his recorder was still recording at that point, Pruszynski just happened to be holding his microphone tilted upward and pointed toward the pantry, and above the heads of the crowd on the ballroom floor beneath him. Doors between Pruszynski and the shooting were open at the time.
Film and video shot by more than one camera in the Embassy Room—in particular, an ABC-TV black and white video-relay camera —captured pictures of Pruszynski, his recorder and microphone in hand, as he descended the ballroom platform's east steps, departed the steps and proceeded toward the kitchen pantry precisely while the shooting was taking place off-camera, inside the pantry. As the Kennedy shooting continued in the pantry, Pruszynski continued moving in the ballroom toward the corridor that accessed the pantry, getting his microphone closer to the shooting but still unaware of the shots erupting in that other room.
Pruszynski's audio recording captured several rapidly occurring sounds, each one very short in duration and with something of a popping or even clapping quality. "Conspiracy Test" quoted four audio experts who analyzed the Pruszynski recording: two experts in the United States , a third in Denmark and a fourth in the United Kingdom . Three of them determined that the tape had captured at least 10 gunshots—and possibly as many as 13 shots—in the RFK assassination; all other possible sources for the sounds, including popping balloons, ricochets, echoes, etc., were ruled out. The presence of at least 10 shots is highly significant because Sirhan's handgun could fire no more than eight shots at a single time and because Sirhan possessed only the one revolver and had no opportunity to reload his weapon once the shooting erupted in the pantry. Confirmation of more than eight shots being fired in the RFK assassination would be strong evidence of a second gun being fired by someone other than Sirhan.
The fourth audio expert dissented on the issue of number of shots, reporting that he was only able to confirm seven or eight shots in the Pruszynski recording. However, the Discovery Times program made it clear that the fourth expert had not been provided all of the information and materials that had been made available to the other three experts. While all four experts bypassed a crude cassette copy of the Pruszynski recording that had been created years before by the California State Archives in Sacramento , only the first three experts worked directly from several high-quality digital and analog master dubs of the recording; the fourth expert had to rely on a copy of just one of those master dubs. Unlike the first three experts, the fourth expert also did not know where Pruszynski and his microphone were located during the Kennedy shooting and was unaware that Pruszynski and his microphone were moving toward the shots as they were being fired. In the TV program, the fourth expert conceded, "Any information relating to where Mr. Pruszynski was standing at the time or any movements he made during the sequence of shots would, to some degree, have been of assistance."
The Pruszynski recording's importance rests not only upon the number of shots fired but also upon two additional issues: the intervals between the shots and differing acoustic characteristics. Accordingly, two of the four audio experts reported that the Pruszynski recording contains evidence of a second gunman firing virtually simultaneously with Sirhan. They determined—and a firearms expert concurred—that there was at least one set of so-called "double-shots," and possibly two sets. In the one set of "double-shots" that these experts confirmed for "Conspiracy Test", the set's twin shots were fired too close together for both to have come from Sirhan's revolver. The shooting's two separate sets of "double-shots"—that is, the third and fourth shots in the first set and the seventh and eighth shots in the second set—were separated by 122 and 149 milliseconds respectively. In field tests, a trained firearms expert firing under ideal conditions could only manage 366 milliseconds between shots using the same weapon. The dissenting fourth audio expert did not address this key issue of shot intervals. In addition to the "double-shot" findings, one of the Discovery Times audio experts reported to the AAFS in 2008 that five of the shots heard in the recording—3, 5, 8, 10 and 12 in a sequence of 13 shots—had odd acoustic characteristics which the expert attributed to their being fired from a second gun pointing away from Pruszynski's microphone. In his scientific paper on the Pruszynski recording, the audio expert reported to the AAFS that a forensic investigation had matched the anomalous acoustic characteristics to those of a Harrington & Richardson .22 firearm known as the H&R Model 922. [14] Sirhan's weapon in the pantry was a .22 caliber Iver-Johnson Cadet .
The significance of the Pruszynski recording was unknown for 36 years until early 2004, when an American journalist obtained a copy of the California State Archives's crude cassette dub of the original recording. The original is the only audio recording known to have captured the actual Robert Kennedy shooting. Two other sound recordings made that night by newsmen Andrew West of Mutual Broadcasting System radio affiliate KRKD and Jeff Brent of the Continental News Service recorded only the shooting's immediate aftermath.
Discovery Times 's "Conspiracy Test" concluded by posing this question: "Will the continuing respect for Robert Kennedy and the new evidence of a second gunman lead to a re-opening of the RFK assassination?" One of the program's audio experts answered it this way: "My feeling about the evidence that's come up here is that you can't back away from real stuff. It merits closer examination. And as a citizen of this country (I believe) it has to be looked at."
New Robert Kennedy Assassination Evidence: The Pruszynski Audio Tape - Associated Content
The following is part 1 of 11 - all easily found on youtube:
YouTube - [Part 01 of 11] CONSPIRACY TEST: THE RFK ASSASSINATION
IS IT POSSIBLE THAT BOBBY KENNEDY WAS KILLED IN A CROSSFIRE BETWEEN BODY-GUARDS AND THE ASSASSIN- PERHAPS KILLED BY "FRIENDLY FIRE"??
 
04-10-2008, 04:46 AM
Bideshi
 
16,445 posts, read 13,636,682 times
Reputation: 9347
It won't be, and if it is it will be glossed over. We will never know the truth.
 
04-10-2008, 06:02 AM
delusianne
 
34,999 posts, read 26,688,439 times
Reputation: 6115
I don't think so...if there had been more shooting I think we'd have heard about it by now.
There were a lot of people there, someone would have heard, smelled, seen...everyone was interviewed to death...the extra bullets would have hit something.
 
04-10-2008, 09:00 AM
Capt. Dan
 
Location: Whiteville Tennessee
8,257 posts, read 13,041,866 times
Reputation: 9862
Where are the shell casings?
 
04-10-2008, 11:09 PM
square peg
 
Location: Vermont / NEK
5,389 posts, read 9,969,195 times
Reputation: 6555
Cronkite's report is worth noting.
YouTube - RFK Assassination As It Happened (Part 3 of 3)
 
04-11-2008, 06:11 AM
TonyT
Status: "Dancing to the symphony of destruction" (set 11 days ago)
 
Location: Turn right at the stop sign
1,313 posts, read 1,922,348 times
Reputation: 2921
In 1968, Secret Service protection was not offered to presidential candidates, so none were present.  Neither LAPD or L.A. County Sheriffs officers were there either.  Only one of the individuals that was acting as a bodyguard for Robert Kennedy that evening was armed. The weapon he carried was a .38 Special.  The bullets that struck Kennedy and the others wounded that night were from a .22, which is exactly what Sirhan Sirhan was carrying.  So, the answer to your question is "No, he was not killed in some sort of crossfire between bodyguards and assassin."
The audiotape simply re-raises the question that was asked in 1968: Was there a second gunman?  The LAPD investigation ruled that out, though some eyewitness statements and such seemed to run contrary to that.  The L.A. County Coroner, Thomas Noguchi, sort of waffled on the subject because the forensics didn't exactly support Sirhan being able to fire the fatal shot from where he was standing in connection with Kennedy.  Noguchi stated some years after the RFK assassination: "Until more is precisely known, the existence of a second gunman remains a possibility. Thus, I have never said that Sirhan Sirhan killed Robert Kennedy."
There is no doubt that Sirhan wished to kill Kennedy. Evidence at his home, specifically handwritten notes stated: "My determination to eliminate RFK is becoming more and more of an unshakable obsession.  RFK must die. RFK must be killed.  Robert F. Kennedy must be assassinated. Robert F. Kennedy must be assassinated before 5 June 1968".  There is also no doubt that Sirhan was there that night, with a gun, and that he clearly fired it at Kennedy.
Unfortunately, much of the forensic evidence from the scene of the assassination has been destroyed or is missing.  Given that fact, it is unlikely a definitive determination could now be made as to whether a second gunman was present or not.  Make no mistake though, Sirhan Sirhan shot Robert F. Kennedy on June 5, 1968.  With or without help in doing it, he is still a guilty man.
 
04-11-2008, 04:06 PM
RABBI JOE
 
Location: New Jersey
316 posts, read 438,446 times
Reputation: 68
Quote:
Originally Posted by TonyT
In 1968, Secret Service protection was not offered to presidential candidates, so none were present. Neither LAPD or L.A. County Sheriffs officers were there either.
How do you know?
Quote:
Only one of the individuals that was acting as a bodyguard for Robert Kennedy that evening was armed. The weapon he carried was a .38 Special. The bullets that struck Kennedy and the others wounded that night were from a .22, which is exactly what Sirhan Sirhan was carrying. So, the answer to your question is "No, he was not killed in some sort of crossfire between bodyguards and assassin."
How do you know?
Quote:
The audiotape simply re-raises the question that was asked in 1968: Was there a second gunman? The LAPD investigation ruled that out, though some eyewitness statements and such seemed to run contrary to that. The L.A. County Coroner, Thomas Noguchi, sort of waffled on the subject because the forensics didn't exactly support Sirhan being able to fire the fatal shot from where he was standing in connection with Kennedy. Noguchi stated some years after the RFK assassination: "Until more is precisely known, the existence of a second gunman remains a possibility. Thus, I have never said that Sirhan Sirhan killed Robert Kennedy."
There is no doubt that Sirhan wished to kill Kennedy. Evidence at his home, specifically handwritten notes stated: "My determination to eliminate RFK is becoming more and more of an unshakable obsession. RFK must die. RFK must be killed. Robert F. Kennedy must be assassinated. Robert F. Kennedy must be assassinated before 5 June 1968". There is also no doubt that Sirhan was there that night, with a gun, and that he clearly fired it at Kennedy.
You seem very sure of yourself... Again.. How do you know?
Quote:
Unfortunately, much of the forensic evidence from the scene of the assassination has been destroyed or is missing. Given that fact, it is unlikely a definitive determination could now be made as to whether a second gunman was present or not. Make no mistake though, Sirhan Sirhan shot Robert F. Kennedy on June 5, 1968. With or without help in doing it, he is still a guilty man.
Again.. How do you know?
 
04-12-2008, 04:28 AM
TonyT
Status: "Dancing to the symphony of destruction" (set 11 days ago)
 
Location: Turn right at the stop sign
1,313 posts, read 1,922,348 times
Reputation: 2921
Quote:
Originally Posted by RABBI JOE
How do you know?
Contemporary news accounts and eyewitness testimony. No LAPD or Los Angeles County Sheriff's were detailed to function as either bodyguards for Senator Kennedy or provide overall security for the event.  In fact, no formal request was made to either agency to provide security at all.  Also, standard issue weapons for both departments at the time were .38 Special revolvers, not .22 revolvers.
How do you know?
News accounts, police reports, and publicly released testimony, and statements from the security guard himself.  Thane Eugene Cesar, an employee of Ace Security was sent at the last minute to act as a bodyguard for Robert Kennedy that night. The weapon that he carried during the event was a .38 Special.  Police examined his weapon and found it unfired. No other weapon was found on his person at the scene. One eyewitness claimed to have seen Mr. Cesar with a smoking gun in his hand.  No other eyewitness corroborated this account and no evidence could be found to support it.
You seem very sure of yourself... Again.. How do you know?
News accounts, the writings of Sirhan Sirhan himself, eyewitness testimony. The notes found in Sirhan Sirhan's room contained the exact words that I quoted in my post. Seems rather clear that he had a specific grudge against Robert Kennedy and felt that he should die. Eyewitnesses placed Sirhan Sirhan at the scene prior to the actual shooting.  Sirhan was seen stepping from the crowd as RFK approached, shouted out "Kennedy you son of a b****!", pointed his weapon at Kennedy and began to fire.  A restaurant maitre'd, Karl Uecker, grabbed Sirhan's arm and pinned it to a table, though Sirhan kept firing.  Rosie Greer and former Olympic athlete Rafer Johnson also tried to subdue Sirhan and get the gun away from him.  Sirhan Sirhan was most definitely at the scene and firing a gun at Robert Kennedy, so I'm not sure what would lead anyone to question that point.
Again.. How do you know?
News accounts and eyewitness statements.  No one has ever disputed that some of the shots Sirhan Sirhan fired struck Robert Kennedy. What can be disputed, and which I mentioned in my post, is whether he was in a position to fire the FATAL shot that led to Kennedy's death.  That is why L.A. County Coroner, Thomas Noguchi made the statment that he did, which again, I quoted in my post.
The words that I used "with or without help":  If Sirhan Sirhan acted alone (which can be questioned) he is guilty. If he was working in concert with others (which has been alleged but never definitively proven) he is still guilty. I meant nothing more in my use of those words.
Rabbi Joe...you asked a very specific question: "Is it possible that Bobby Kennedy was killed in a crossfire between body-guards and the assassin - perhaps killed by 'friendly fire'??"
The answer that I gave "No", was based on readily available information that has been in the public realm since 1968.  The facts I offered in support of my answer were not then, and still to this day, have not be refuted, at least not with credible evidence. There are certainly things that can be questioned, which I do not deny.  But the scenario that you painted has no factual foundation to support it.
Personally, it is of no consequence to me whether you believe me or not.  I have no agenda here, no stake in the matter.  I was just a child when the assassination took place so it had no real impact on my life.  It is just another historical event to me.
And as I said, the information that I supplied is out there, available from multiple sources.  Go do what I did; read the facts and read the conspiracy sites too if you like. You may reach the same conclusion that I did or not.  Either way, it's all up to you.
 
04-12-2008, 04:53 AM
David Kennedy
 
4,714 posts, read 9,941,616 times
Reputation: 999
How many bullets were taken from RFK's body?   Did they all come from the same pistol?
In 1968 battery powered tape recorders were very primitive.  the 'Echo Factor would make the shots sound like multiples...It was a gangland hit just like the brother...Hoffa connected.
 
04-12-2008, 05:51 AM
delusianne
 
34,999 posts, read 26,688,439 times
Reputation: 6115
In 1968 the JFK assassination conspiracy theories were still new and raw. It's safe to assume that every investigator of RFK's murder, professional and amateur, quadruple-checked every possibility for the tiniest indication that Sirhan might not have acted alone.
Please register to post and access all features of our very popular forum. It is free and quick. Over $68,000 in prizes has already been given out to active posters on our forum. Additional giveaways are planned.
Detailed information about all U.S. cities, counties, and zip codes on our site: City-data.com .
 
Page 1 of 4
1
2
3
4
>
City-Data Forum Message
 
Cancel Changes
Quick Reply
The following errors occurred with your submission
Okay
Message:
 Posting Quick Reply - Please Wait
 
City-Data Forum > General Forums > History
Similar Threads
Assassination of President Kennedy , History, 92 replies
Ted Kennedy Really Hate America? , History, 32 replies
J.F. Kennedy, M.L. King, Bobby.....there is no question in the mind of this young girl. , History, 2 replies
Late Ted Kennedy worked with KBG? , History, 0 replies
Kathleen Kennedy , History, 0 replies
The Kennedy Assasination , History, 108 replies
All times are GMT -6.
© 2005-2016, Advameg, Inc.
City-Data.com - Archive 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 23 , 24 , 25 , 26 , 27 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 31 , - Top