SEP
MAR
JUL
21
2013
2016
2017
22 captures
20 Oct 11 - 21 Jul 16
Close Help
Jump to Content
Search OAC
Home Browse Institutions Browse Collections Browse Map About OAC Help
What is OAC?
> Home > California State Archives
Collection Guide
∞ http://www.oac.cdlib.org/findaid/ark:/13030/kt2j49r8f6
Collection Title:
Collection Number:
Get Items:
Inventory of the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department Records - Sirhan Sirhan Case File
96-03-17
No online items
Contact California State Archives
View entire collection guide
PDF (104.70 Kb)
HTML
Search this collection
Entire Collection Guide
Online Items
Collection Overview
Table of contents
Description
The Los Angeles Sheriff's Department records - Sirhan Sirhan case file contains twelve cubic feet of textual and photographic                                        records covering the period of his confinement by the Sheriff's Department following the assassination of Senator Robert F.                                        Kennedy in 1968.
The materials consist of two groups of records, the Sheriff's Department office files and a partial transcript                                        of the proceedings during Sirhan Sirhan's trial.
Background
In the early hours of June 5, 1968, New York Senator Robert F. Kennedy addressed a crowd of his supporters at the Ambassador                                        Hotel in Los Angeles.
Senator Kennedy, a candidate for President of the United States, had just won the California Democratic                                        Primary.
Winning the California primary was critical to his quest for the Democratic Party nomination.
Senator Kennedy concluded                                        his victory speech and then stepped from the stage and proceeded to walk through a kitchen pantry area of the hotel, shaking                                        hands with some of the people who had gathered to see him.
Shots were fired and Senator Kennedy and five other people were                                        wounded in the shooting.
Senator Kennedy died the next day as a result of his wounds.
Extent
12 cubic feet of textual and photographic records
Restrictions
For permission to reproduce or publish, please contact the California State Archives.
Permission for reproduction or publication                                        is given on behalf of the California State Archives as the owner of the physical items.
The researcher assumes all responsibility                                        for possible infringement which may arise from reproduction or publication of materials from the California State Archives                                        collections.
Availability
Every effort has been made to provide the fullest possible disclosure of the records.
In the few places where restrictions                                        are noted, the justification is firmly rooted in California statutory law.
The specific statutory restrictions are as follows:
Collection Overview
Collection Details
Descriptive Summary
Administrative Information
Historical Notes
Scope and Content
Related Collections at the California State Archives
Indexing Terms
Series Descriptions
Jail Logs
Personal Deputies Statements
Visitor Passes and Interview Request Forms
Meal Diaries
Requests for Reading Materials
Subject Files
Publicity Order
Chronological Files
Letter Logs
Letters
Security Files
Courtroom Admittance Rosters
Correspondence and Memorandums
Newspaper Clippings
News Releases
Press Inquiries Log
Photographs
Trial Transcripts
Publications
Home | Browse Institutions | Browse Collections | Browse Map | About OAC | Help | Contact Us | Privacy Statement | Terms of Use
The Online Archive of California is an initiative of the California Digital Library.