1937 08/21 WY 15-Fatality Blackwater CCC
1937 08/21 WY 15-Fatality Blackwater CCC
 
Personnel:  15 lives lost, 38 injured
Age:
Summary:
Alfred G Clayton, Ranger South Fork District, Shoshone NF, age 45
James T. Saban, CCC Technical Foreman - Tensleep Camp F-35 (former Forest Ranger on Medicine Bow and Chippewa NFs), age 36
Rex A. Hale, Jr Assistant to the Technician, Shoshone NF; from the Wapiti CCC camp, age 21
Paul E. Tyrrell, Jr Forester, Bighorn NF (Foreman), died later at hospital 8/26, age 24
Billy Lea, Bureau of Public Roads Crewman, originally from OR, died later at hospital
CCC Enrollees: Tensleep Camp F-35 in the Bighorn NF; Company 1811 - 3 months earlier came from Bastrop area of Texas, ages 17 to 20 years
John B. Gerdes of Halletsville TX
Will C. Griffith, Bastrop TX
Mack T. Mayabb, Smithville TX
George E. Rodgers, George TX
Roy Bevens, died later at hospital in Cody, WY, of Smithville TX
Clyde Allen, McDade TX
Rubin D. Sherry, Smithville TX
William Whitlock, died later at a hospital in Cody WY, of Austin TX
Ambrocio Garza, died 8/23 at a hospital in Cody, WY, of Corpus Christi TX
On August 21, 1937, the tragic Blackwater Fire caused the death of 15 firefighters, injury of 38 others, and burned approximately 1,700 acres of National Forest System lands on the Shoshone National Forest, near Cody, Wyoming.
An electrical storm occurred in the general vicinity of Blackwater Creek on Wednesday, August 18th causing a fire, which was not detected until August 20th. At the time of detection the fire appeared to be only 2 acres in size and was located in the drainage bottom. By the evening of Friday, August 20th the fire had grown to approximately 200 acres and there were 58 men and 7 overhead constructing fireline in an orderly manner and with good speed. Early Saturday morning the man-power was about evenly distributed along the two main flanks of the fire. As more crews arrived and line construction advanced to the east on the hottest section of fireline, a blow-up of the fire occurred at approximately 15:45 caused by the combination of an undiscovered "spot" and the passage of a dry cold front. In this conflagration 9 deaths occurred directly. Six additional men were so badly burned that death ensued, and 38 additional men suffered injuries. (from the excellent Blackwater Staff Ride ) The Fireline Handbook was developed following this fire.
Alfred Clayton
Paul Tyrell
Rex Hale
Urban Post and a number of youmg men with him on the rocky knoll were badly burned, but survived.
Urban Post
 
Photos of some of the CCC "boys" (young men), from their Bastrop, Texas high school yearbook, thanks to Roxanne Hickman, professional photographer who resized and digitally enhanced photographs from the small year book. Hover over photo for the name; click for larger image.
Ambrocio Garza
John Gerdes, Roy Bevins, and Rubin Sherry
Blackwater Memorial, dedicated Aug 21, 1939, 71 feet long
Blackwater Memorial
Blackwater Memorial
Blackwater Memorial
This monument with the names of the fallen and injured is located on the Bighorn National Forest above Meadowlark Lake. The monument is accessible directly next to US Highway 16. This highway runs from Worland to Buffalo, Wyoming over the Bighorn Mountains. The reason for the monument's location on the Bighorn National Forest is that the Ten Sleep CCC Company (1811) that the fallen and injured crew were assigned to was stationed there.
Blackwater Memorial Names
From the Annals of Wyoming: Alfred Clayton sketch
Annals of Wyoming, Alfred Clayton sketch
Maps
Blackwater
The Daily Plainsman, Aug 24, 1937, p7
CODY. Wyo- Aug. 24 -- Superviser John Seiker, of the Shoshone National Forest, said today lightning, striking a remote pine filled canyon, "unmistakably" caused the savage forest blaze that took the lives of 14 firefighters. Seiker reported 500 weary and smoke-choked men on the fire line now had the biaze under complete control. He estimated the flames hod swept over 2,000 acres in the Absaroka Mountains. "Lightning is the only possible thing that could have started a fire in there," Seiker declared. "There is no human habitation within seven or eight miles of the canyon entrance," he said. "We are sure, too, that no party of humans went into the canyon before the fire started." The fourteenth victim of the fire died last night in a Cody hospital. He was Ambrocio Garza of Corpus Christi, Tex., member of the Tensleep CCC camp.
Photos, Videos, & Tributes
Hike and CCC Memorial Markers: Opportunities for learning from the tragedy
Blackwater Interpreter Guide Staff Hike, Karl Brauneis. (This was the first trial staff hike with a local Shoshone National Forest Crew.)
Blackwater Interpreter Guide Staff Hike
Blackwater Memorial Trail
George E. Rodgers,
Mack T. Mayabb
Spot in the Hole from the Post Point Memorial (Note: It is a 10 and 1/2 mile hike through grizzly country to get to Post Point on the fire. So, make sure you have bear spray or a 30-30 or big frame revolver. The trail is very good and easy on horseback.)
Spot in the Hole from the Post Point Memorial
Post Point Memorial Plaque
Post Point Memorial, the third memorial built by the CCCs in 1938. Marks the location where the firefighters with Post sought refuge.
Text: Blackwater Fire August 20-24, 1937
Here on the afternoon of August 21, 1937, thirty-seven enrollees of CCC Company 1811 in charge of Ranger Post and Jr Forester Tyrell, with seven Bureau of Public Roads employees including foreman Davis and Fire Cooperator Sullivan in charge, took refuge from the fire. Five men attempted to escape through the fire and four of them -- Lea, Allen, Seelke and Sherry perished. Ranger Post and all of the forty who remained with him received burns of varying severity and three of these -- Junior Forester Tyrrell, and enrollees Whitlock and Garza -- died later
We know you have heard the story,
Which was news a few weeks ago;
When fire in the State of Wyoming
Felled a ranger, with one fatal blow.
It was only news to the many
Who gave it but passing thought;
But to us who know fire-fighting
Twas an act which God had wrought.
You know how the accident happened;
How he came to relieve the distressed;
Took charge of the job of suppression,
While others sought food and rest.
With no intimation of danger
He began his attack on the fire,
And with not a thought that his forest
Would soon be his funeral pyre.
But fate and fiendish fire-forces
Joined hands to defeat the new foe;
And he and his youthful companions
Were trapped - and their bodies laid low.
But their spirits soared on to glory,
To report to The Chief, up on High,
Who, we know, gives to all a welcome,
Who so gallantly, fearlessly die.
When a soldier goes forth to battle,
There are orders he must obey;
But no high commands or bugle-call
Were urging him on that day.
He saw his duty and did it,
And paid the full price it demands;
But his name will live, as a symbol
Of duty that needs no commands.
To us he was truly heroic
For - "He died our forests to save";
And that epitaph, carved on a tombstone
Would appropriately mark his grave.
And whene'er we sit 'round our camp-fires,
We'll recall his unselfish deed;
And with sorrowful hearts remember
That he, at the last, proved our creed.
A hero? Oh no! just a ranger
Who answered unquestioned the call;
Whose motto - like ours - was service;
Who gave to "The Service" his all.
And a promise we give to his loved ones,
That as long as rangers shall ride,
The name of Alfred G. Clayton
Will still be remembered with pride.
Transcribed from the original by Karl Brauneis, Forester at Lander, Wyoming
High Point Lookout and Lookout view from Karl Brauneis. The lookout is near the monument with names of the dead and ionjured on the Bighorn National Forest above Meadowlark Lake. This lookout has a road to it. It's an easy way to get the lay of the land by vehicle without a lot of hiking.
High Point Lookout
High Point Lookout View
There will be a May 15th, 2015 staff ride - hike - "Lessons Learned up the Blackwater
Invitation and map to the Ceremony celebrating the Rededication of the James T Sabin Lookout, June 20, 2015 at 1PM
Invitation to the Rededication of the James T Sabin Lookout
Map to Lookout Rededication