TEN STANDARD FIREFIGHTING ORDERS
The Ten Standard Firefighting Orders are a set of systematically organized rules designed by a USDA Forest Service task force to reduce danger to personnel and increase fire fighting efficiency. The rules were based upon the success of the United States Armed Forces' General Orders for Sentries, a set of guidelines designed for safety and efficiency for military personnel standing sentry duty. The Ten Standard Orders were later supplemented by 18 Situations That Shout Watch Out, or the 18 Watchout Situations. While the original orders were designed to be implemented in an order of importance, the order was changed in the 1980s to remove this priority of orders and create an easy to remember list with each order beginning with an initial of "Fire Orders", then returned to the original order in 2002. A primary consideration for firefighters addressed by these orders is to be able to gain timely warning of a danger allowing the firefighter to safely escape. The orders were developed from lessons learned in a number of major wildland fires that led to the deaths of trapped firefighters including the Shoshone National Forest Blackwater fire of 1937 and the Helena National Forest Mann Gulch Fire in 1949. The order can be a basis for evaluating the aftermath of a firefighting situation, although some firefighters have criticized the orders as being difficult to follow.
TEN STANDARD FIREFIGHTING ORDERS Videos
10 Standard Firefighting Orders
10 Standard Firefighting Orders

Nulato's Melvin Demoski holds the 2014 Alaska Advanced Wildland Firefighting Academy record. Can you beat him reciting the 10 Standard Firefighting orders ...
Ten Standard Firefighting Orders

Melvin Demoski of Nulato holds the Advanced Wildland Firefighting Academy record for reciting the Ten Standard Firefighting Orders in 21 seconds.
The 10 Standard Firefighting Orders.

The 10 Standard Firefighting Orders for firefighters for all branches. Wildland, Municipal, Military, and Private sectors.
10 Standard Firefighting Orders

Seasonal Firefighter Rookie Newman reviews the Ten Standard Wildland Firefighting Orders.
Standard Firefighting Orders

Standard Firefighting Orders.
Top 2 Mejores Goles »Soccer Stars.
Rising Stars Presents : Top Speaker : 2nd Episode : Amanda Siziba
Utah Stars of Rick Mount Top 7 Facts.mp4
Related Topics
Blackwater fire of 1937
program in 1939. Additionally, the Ten Standard Firefighting Orders, a standardized set of wildland firefighting principles, were developed in 1957.
Wildfire suppression
Wildfire suppression is a range of firefighting tactics used to suppress wildfires. Firefighting efforts in wild land areas require different techniques
Mann Gulch fire
significant effect on firefighter training. Two training protocols—"Ten Standard Firefighting Orders" and "Eighteen Situations That Shout Watch Out"—were incorporated
Glossary of firefighting
list does not include firefighting equipment, i.e., tools and apparatus used by firefighters. Please refer to Glossary of firefighting equipment for such
Great Fire of London
spread rapidly west across the City of London. The use of the major firefighting technique of the time, the creation of firebreaks by means of demolition
Halifax Explosion
(127-millimetre) hawser initially produced was deemed too small and orders for a ten-inch (254-millimetre) hawser came down. It was at this point that the