MAR
APR
JUN
7
2015
2016
2017
45 captures
20 Feb 06 - 15 Jun 16
Close Help
BACK TO TOOLBOX
SITE MAP
FEEDBACK
About Staff Rides
Facilitator Tips
Staff Ride References
The Library
1910 Idaho Fire
Bar Harbor Fire
Battlement Creek Fire
Blackwater Fire
Cart Creek Fire
Cerro Grande Fire
Dude Fire
Loop Fire
Mack Lake Fire
Mann Gulch Fire
Rattlesnake Fire
Rock Creek Fire
South Canyon Fire
Thirtymile Fire
Local Staff Ride Archive
Home > The Library
Staff Ride to the Blackwater Fire
Facilitator Support
Maps
Information Sources
Stand Descriptions
On August 21, 1937, the tragic Blackwater Fire caused the death of 15 firefighters, burning approximately 1,700 acres of  Shoshone National Forest land, near Cody, Wyoming.
An electrical storm occurred in the general vicinity of Blackwater Creek on Wednesday, August 18th causing a fire, which was not detected until August 20th.  At the time of detection, the fire appeared to be only 2 acres in size and was located in the drainage bottom.  By the evening of Friday, August 20th,  the fire had grown to approximately 200 acres and there were 58 men and 7 overhead constructing fireline in an orderly manner and with good speed.  Early Saturday morning the man-power was about evenly distributed along the two main flanks of the fire.  As more crews arrived and line construction advanced to the east on the hottest section of fireline, a blowup of the fire occurred at approximately 1545 caused by the combination of an undiscovered "spot" and the passage of a dry cold front.  In this conflagration, 9 deaths occurred directly.  Six additional men were so badly burned that death ensued, and 38 additional men suffered injuries.
Preliminary reports on this lightning fire showed that initial action was vigorous; quite remarkably so, considering the remote location of the fire and that the Shoshone National Forest was considered a low-danger forest.  The forest didn't even have lookout stations.  Up until 1939, the Blackwater Fire was the largest loss of life from a single national forest fire since 1910.
The Blackwater Fire was the first fatality fire to have significant investigation and study of the event done immediately after the tragedy.  This analysis of the fire eventually led to the development of the smokejumper program, a management action to address the time delay problems encountered for crews responding to the fire.
The Blackwater Fire Staff Ride resource is a product of the NWCG Leadership Committee.  Project team members were:
Karl Brauneis - U.S. Forest Service - Shoshone National Fores
Rick Connell - U.S. Forest Service - Shoshone National Forest
Jim Cook - U.S. Forest Service - National Interagency Fire Center
Sue Curd - Bureau of Land Management - National Interagency Fire Center
Bob Kambitsch - Bureau of Land Management - National Interagency Fire Center
Chris Huhnerkoch - U.S. Forest Service - Black Hills National Forest
Shawna Lagarza - U.S. Forest Service - San Juan National Forest
Randy Skelton  - U.S. Forest Service - Black Hills National Forest
Chris Schow - U.S. Forest Service - Shoshone National Forest
Nina Walker - Bureau of Land Management - National Interagency Fire Center
The interview of Johnny J. Levine was conducted by Conrad Smith (Professor University of Wyoming) in November 1995.