Fabius Maximus website
Contact us
Tag Archives: barry goldwater
5 Replies
Summary: 19 June 1964.
I believe on this day America took a wrong turn.
It was the day we took a large step to closure on the wound opened by the Civil War, another step to atoning for and overcoming the legacy of slavery.
The Senate voted to pass the 1964 Civil Rights Bill .
But one of the opponents saw this as an opportunity, and we live with the dark results today
.
Reflecting the parties geographical, not ideological, foundations, the vote passing the 1964 Civil Rights Act was mixed.
Democratic Party: 46–21   (69–31%)
Republican Party: 27–06   (82–18%)
But one of those “no” votes was by the GOP candidate for the Presidency, who saw an opportunity to redraw America’s political map and end the  dominant position the Democratic Party had held since the Great Depression.
The price was betrayal of the Republican Party’s legacy.
Senator Barry Goldwater (R-AZ) lost the 1964 presidential election, but his campaign reforged a Republican Party with racism as a core element — burned into an alliance with the right-wing social and economic ideologies.
The poison took time to spread through the GOP, but by 1980 — amplified by Nixon and Reagan — it helped make conservatism become the dominant political force in America (affecting both parties).
That day 50 years ago could have begun a break with our past.
Instead we’re still grappling with our racist legacy from slavery.
Here’s the speech Goldwater gave justifying his betrayal.
Brad DeLong (Prof Economics, Berkeley) decodes the key phrases he uses to disguise his political logic.
“Demagogue” = “Martin Luther King, Jr., and the March on Washington”
“Calm environment” = “an end to sit-ins and Freedom Rides”
“Special appeals for special welfare” = “desire by African-Americans to eat at lunch counters and stay at hotels open to others”
The text, from DeLong’s post:
There have been few, if any, occasions when the searching of my conscience and the re-examination of my views of our constitutional system have played a greater part in the determination of my vote than they have on this occasion.
I am unalterably opposed to discrimination or segregation on the basis of race, color, or creed, or on any other basis; not only my words, but more importantly my actions through the years have repeatedly demonstrated the sincerity of my feeling in this regard.
This is fundamentally a matter of the heart.
The problems of discrimination can never by cured by laws alone; but I would be the first to agree that laws can help — laws carefully considered and weighed in an atmosphere of dispassion, in the absence of political demagoguery, and in the light of fundamental constitutional principles.
For example, throughout my 12 years as a member of the Senate Labor and Public Welfare Committee, I have repeatedly offered amendments to bills pertaining to labor that would end discrimination in unions, and repeatedly those amendments have been turned down by the very members of both parties who now so vociferously support the present approach to the solution of our problem.
Talk is one thing, action is another, and until the members of this body and the people of this country realize this, there will be no real solution to the problem we fact.
Leave a reply
Summary:  Americans know so little of our own history, our own politics.
So it’s fun and educational to play Name That Liberal.
In round 3 we see how the meaning of “conservative” in America has evolved during the past few generations.
This man was one of the men who shaped American political doctrine during the latter half of the 20th century’s.
A conservative in his time, but today probably unelectable as a Republican in many areas.
What did he do?
His first elective office:  “City Council, as part of a group of candidates aimed at cleaning up widespread prostitution and gambling.
( source ).
He sponsored the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act , despite strong opposition from conservatives who claimed that the Act was a plot to establish concentration camps in Alaska.
He was a strong supporter of Sandra Day O’Connor’s nomination to the Supreme Court, the first women Justice.
During his last term in the Senate he consistently voted in support of legalized abortion.
He was honorary co-chairman of Americans Against Discrimination, working to end discrimination against homosexuals.
What did he say?
Leave a reply
The evolution of the Republican Party has been one of the great forces shaping American politics since the 1960’s — an amazing transformation from pro-civil rights, isolationism, and fiscal prudence to advocacy of racism, foreign wars, and massive deficits.
Goldwater’s decision to vote against the 1964 Civil Rights Act inaugurated the first (a reversal of his long-standing support for civil rights), followed by Nixon’s southern strategy (crafted by Pat Buchanan and later Kevin Phillips).
Note that Nixon, as the most-liberal President since FDR, probably did more for minorities than any President other than Lincoln and LBJ (America is a complex place).
Foreign wars:  adopting Vietnam from the liberals, the Gulf War and the Iraq War (establishing Iran as a potential hegemon in the Middle East), and the Af-Pak War.
Massive deficits, the subject of this post.
Unlike the first two changes, the last has a definite origin, one of the most brilliant combinations of political insight and myth-making in our history.
It’s worth reading, to understand why today America’s Federal and many State governments teeter on the brink of bankruptcy:  “ Taxes and a Two-Santa Theory “, Jude Wanniski, National Observer, 6 March 1976.
Here is the opening; the remainder establishes the mythology of tax cuts.
The only thing wrong with the U.S. economy is the failure of the Republican Party to play Santa Claus.
The only thing wrong with President Ford is that he is still too much a Hoover Republican when what the country needs is a Coolidge Republican.
These statements, seemingly absurd, follow naturally from the Two-Santa Claus Theory of the political economy.
Simply stated, the Two Santa Claus Theory is this: For the U.S. economy to be healthy and growing, there must be a division of labor between Democrats and Republicans; each must be a different kind of Santa Claus.
The Democrats, the party of income redistribution, are best suited for the role of Spending Santa Claus.
The Republicans, traditionally the party of income growth, should be the Santa Claus of Tax Reduction.
It has been the failure of the GOP to stick to this traditional role that has caused much of the nation’s economic misery.
Only the shrewdness of the Democrats, who have kindly agreed to play both Santa Clauses during critical periods, has saved the nation from even greater misery.
It isn’t that Republicans don’t enjoy cutting taxes.
They love it.
But there is something in the Republican chemistry that causes the GOP to become hypnotized by the prospect of an imbalanced budget.
Static analysis tells them taxes can’t be cut or inflation will result.
They either argue for a tax hike to dampen inflation when the economy is in a boom or demand spending cuts to balance the budget when the economy is in recession.
Trillions of dollars in debt later, now conservatives spin a different story.
As we see in this excerpt from “ Goodbye Supply Side :”, Kevin Williamson, National Review, 3 May 2010:
A vital opposition party being essential in a two-party system, the fate of the Republican Party will deserve almost as much attention as the activities of the newly dominant Democratic Party.
Here are some guesses about the future.
Collapse of the Republican Party
Defectors from the Party, foreshadowing doom
Door #1:  Purge the Party’s membership, keeping only the faithful
Door #2:  reflection and rebuilding
A historical note on the two Party system
1.
Collapse of the Republican Party
After a quarter-century in power, to varying degrees, the Republican Party not only faces defeat but disintegration, political and intellectual.
The Administrations of the two Bushes have ripped the Party from its modern foundation forged by Barry Goldwater and William Buckley in the 1960’s.
A massive tax increase and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 under Bush Sr., the latter of the largest expansions of Federal power for decades — until Bush Jr.
Bush Jr’s contempt for civil liberties (other than gun control), massive spending and deficits (a Republican tradition since Reagan), massive expansion of government power, pro-open borders, and enthusiasm for foreign wars.
McCain’s erratic political history — spun as being a “maverick” — gave few signs of change to this mess, other than his steadfast enthusiasm for foreign wars.
As a result the party has almost no doctrinal coherence — what does it stand for?
The only strong, consistent policy is opposition to abortion — a long-term aspect of its platform that has over decades has had little impact on public policy.
Probably because of the strong public consensus for a position between the extreme views held by the two major parties.
Politically the party has alienated many of its core constituencies.
McCain’s long-held contempt for the “religious right”.
Bush Jr’s and McCain’s strong support for open borders –opposing one of the most strongly held beliefs of the party core.
Most of all, Bush Jr’s disastrous management of the domestic economy and our foreign wars.