Operation Clambake Message Board
Quote
Post by SeeYaBye » Thu Jan 15, 2009 4:49 pm
The Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act (aka: The Siberia Bill) was talked about by David Miscavige in his intervview with Ted Koppel on Nightline some years ago. That interview can be found on Youtube. I was curious about this bill that was before Congress in 1956. This has some pretty interesting facts about the Bill and $cientology's crazy stance on it:
I still find it hard to believe that I once considered myself a member of this ridiculous nut-job "church" and believed that everything that the great LRH said was the gospel truth.
"The truth is the kindest thing we can give folks in the end."  - Harriet Beecher Stowe
Quote
Post by RealityWillTell » Thu Jan 15, 2009 6:58 pm
Of course scientology had a paranoid fear of imagined psychiatric American gulags (which would have never happened), it would have stood as competition to their own scientology ones to come! (namely the RPF!)
Here also is just another instance of the church (sic) of $cientology not only bending the truth because the bill still did pass (albeit slightly amended but essentially the same bill) but also flat out lying about their presence in trying to stop the bill (other groups but not scientology are mentioned in senate hearings).
.
Joined: Thu Apr 28, 2005 10:09 pm
Location: Los Feliz, California
Quote
Post by J. Swift » Fri Jan 16, 2009 12:04 am
This bill was an early attempt to establish a mental health care system in Alaska when it was still a US Territory ( Alaska became a State on January 3, 1959). The intent of the bill was to use forestry and mining monies derived from US-owned land in Alaska to self-fund a mental health care system in Alaska. Read the Wiki article and you will see that fringe groups got involved. They feared the polio vaccine, fluoridated water, and psychiatry. The following line spoken in 1956 sure sounds familiar:
Mrs. Ernest W. Howard of the Women's Patriotic Committee on National Defense castigated the slackness of Congress for not picking up on the bill's perceived dangers: "Those of us who have been in the study and research work of the United Nations, we feel that we are experts in this . . .
ref: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alaska_Men ... abling_Act
"We are the experts. We are the authorities. We don't need permission...." These are the lines spoken by Cultists of the world who want to tell the rest of us what is best for us -- and what is dangerous to their pocketbooks, bigotries, and poisonous ideologies:
John Kaspar, a White Citizens' Council organizer who had achieved notoriety for starting a race riot in Clinton, Tennessee, declared that "almost one hundred percent of all psychiatric therapy is Jewish and about eighty percent of psychiatrists are Jewish . . . one particular race is administering this particular thing." He argued that Jews were nationalists of another country who were attempting to "usurp American nationality."
ref: ibid.