OCT
MAR
Apr
14
2014
2016
2017
5 captures
26 Jul 13 - 14 Mar 16
Close Help
Fabius Maximus website
Menu
Skip to content
Home
About: website
About: authors
Our politics
Past predictions
Smackdowns
Contact us
Tag Archives: barry goldwater
Congress did a great thing 50 years ago, but rot from that day has spread and taken root
5 Replies
Summary: 19 June 1964.
I believe on this day America took a wrong turn.
It was the day we took a large step to closure on the wound opened by the Civil War, another step to atoning for and overcoming the legacy of slavery.
The Senate voted to pass the 1964 Civil Rights Bill .
But one of the opponents saw this as an opportunity, and we live with the dark results today
.
Reflecting the parties geographical, not ideological, foundations, the vote passing the 1964 Civil Rights Act was mixed.
Democratic Party: 46–21   (69–31%)
Republican Party: 27–06   (82–18%)
But one of those “no” votes was by the GOP candidate for the Presidency, who saw an opportunity to redraw America’s political map and end the  dominant position the Democratic Party had held since the Great Depression.
The price was betrayal of the Republican Party’s legacy.
Senator Barry Goldwater (R-AZ) lost the 1964 presidential election, but his campaign reforged a Republican Party with racism as a core element — burned into an alliance with the right-wing social and economic ideologies.
The poison took time to spread through the GOP, but by 1980 — amplified by Nixon and Reagan — it helped make conservatism become the dominant political force in America (affecting both parties).
That day 50 years ago could have begun a break with our past.
Instead we’re still grappling with our racist legacy from slavery.
Here’s the speech Goldwater gave justifying his betrayal.
Brad DeLong (Prof Economics, Berkeley) decodes the key phrases he uses to disguise his political logic.
“Demagogue” = “Martin Luther King, Jr., and the March on Washington”
“Calm environment” = “an end to sit-ins and Freedom Rides”
“Special appeals for special welfare” = “desire by African-Americans to eat at lunch counters and stay at hotels open to others”
The text, from DeLong’s post:
There have been few, if any, occasions when the searching of my conscience and the re-examination of my views of our constitutional system have played a greater part in the determination of my vote than they have on this occasion.
I am unalterably opposed to discrimination or segregation on the basis of race, color, or creed, or on any other basis; not only my words, but more importantly my actions through the years have repeatedly demonstrated the sincerity of my feeling in this regard.
This is fundamentally a matter of the heart.
The problems of discrimination can never by cured by laws alone; but I would be the first to agree that laws can help — laws carefully considered and weighed in an atmosphere of dispassion, in the absence of political demagoguery, and in the light of fundamental constitutional principles.
For example, throughout my 12 years as a member of the Senate Labor and Public Welfare Committee, I have repeatedly offered amendments to bills pertaining to labor that would end discrimination in unions, and repeatedly those amendments have been turned down by the very members of both parties who now so vociferously support the present approach to the solution of our problem.
Talk is one thing, action is another, and until the members of this body and the people of this country realize this, there will be no real solution to the problem we fact.
Continue reading →
This entry was posted in America and tagged 1964 civil rights act , barry goldwater , civil rights , racism , republican party , right-wing on
26 June 2014
by Editor of the Fabius Maximus website .
Let’s play round 3 of “Name That Liberal”
Leave a reply
Summary:  Americans know so little of our own history, our own politics.
So it’s fun and educational to play Name That Liberal.
In round 3 we see how the meaning of “conservative” in America has evolved during the past few generations.
This man was one of the men who shaped American political doctrine during the latter half of the 20th century’s.
A conservative in his time, but today probably unelectable as a Republican in many areas.
What did he do?
His first elective office:  “City Council, as part of a group of candidates aimed at cleaning up widespread prostitution and gambling.
( source ).
He sponsored the Alaska Mental Health Enabling Act , despite strong opposition from conservatives who claimed that the Act was a plot to establish concentration camps in Alaska.
He was a strong supporter of Sandra Day O’Connor’s nomination to the Supreme Court, the first women Justice.
During his last term in the Senate he consistently voted in support of legalized abortion.
He was honorary co-chairman of Americans Against Discrimination, working to end discrimination against homosexuals.
What did he say?
Quotations are from Wikiquote .
“I think every good Christian ought to kick Falwell right in the ass.”
— Quote from Time magazine .
Jerry Falwell was founder of Moral Majority
Continue reading →
This entry was posted in History , Politics and tagged barry goldwater , conservatism , liberalism , republican party on
9 July 2010
by Editor of the Fabius Maximus website .
The evolution of the Republican Party has shaped America during the past fifty years
Leave a reply
The evolution of the Republican Party has been one of the great forces shaping American politics since the 1960’s — an amazing transformation from pro-civil rights, isolationism, and fiscal prudence to advocacy of racism, foreign wars, and massive deficits.
Goldwater’s decision to vote against the 1964 Civil Rights Act inaugurated the first (a reversal of his long-standing support for civil rights), followed by Nixon’s southern strategy (crafted by Pat Buchanan and later Kevin Phillips).
Note that Nixon, as the most-liberal President since FDR, probably did more for minorities than any President other than Lincoln and LBJ (America is a complex place).
Foreign wars:  adopting Vietnam from the liberals, the Gulf War and the Iraq War (establishing Iran as a potential hegemon in the Middle East), and the Af-Pak War.
Massive deficits, the subject of this post.
Unlike the first two changes, the last has a definite origin, one of the most brilliant combinations of political insight and myth-making in our history.
It’s worth reading, to understand why today America’s Federal and many State governments teeter on the brink of bankruptcy:  “ Taxes and a Two-Santa Theory “, Jude Wanniski, National Observer, 6 March 1976.
Here is the opening; the remainder establishes the mythology of tax cuts.
The only thing wrong with the U.S. economy is the failure of the Republican Party to play Santa Claus.
The only thing wrong with President Ford is that he is still too much a Hoover Republican when what the country needs is a Coolidge Republican.
These statements, seemingly absurd, follow naturally from the Two-Santa Claus Theory of the political economy.
Simply stated, the Two Santa Claus Theory is this: For the U.S. economy to be healthy and growing, there must be a division of labor between Democrats and Republicans; each must be a different kind of Santa Claus.
The Democrats, the party of income redistribution, are best suited for the role of Spending Santa Claus.
The Republicans, traditionally the party of income growth, should be the Santa Claus of Tax Reduction.
It has been the failure of the GOP to stick to this traditional role that has caused much of the nation’s economic misery.
Only the shrewdness of the Democrats, who have kindly agreed to play both Santa Clauses during critical periods, has saved the nation from even greater misery.
It isn’t that Republicans don’t enjoy cutting taxes.
They love it.
But there is something in the Republican chemistry that causes the GOP to become hypnotized by the prospect of an imbalanced budget.
Static analysis tells them taxes can’t be cut or inflation will result.
They either argue for a tax hike to dampen inflation when the economy is in a boom or demand spending cuts to balance the budget when the economy is in recession.
Trillions of dollars in debt later, now conservatives spin a different story.
As we see in this excerpt from “ Goodbye Supply Side :”, Kevin Williamson, National Review, 3 May 2010:
Continue reading →
This entry was posted in Politics and tagged arthur laffer , barry goldwater , deficits , fiscal policy , government debt , jude wanniski , kevin phillips , kevin williamson , patrick buchanan , republican party , richard nixon on
8 May 2010
by Editor of the Fabius Maximus website .
What happens to the Republican Party after the election?
26 Replies
A vital opposition party being essential in a two-party system, the fate of the Republican Party will deserve almost as much attention as the activities of the newly dominant Democratic Party.
Here are some guesses about the future.
Collapse of the Republican Party
Defectors from the Party, foreshadowing doom
Door #1:  Purge the Party’s membership, keeping only the faithful
Door #2:  reflection and rebuilding
A historical note on the two Party system
1.
Collapse of the Republican Party
After a quarter-century in power, to varying degrees, the Republican Party not only faces defeat but disintegration, political and intellectual.
The Administrations of the two Bushes have ripped the Party from its modern foundation forged by Barry Goldwater and William Buckley in the 1960’s.
A massive tax increase and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 under Bush Sr., the latter of the largest expansions of Federal power for decades — until Bush Jr.
Bush Jr’s contempt for civil liberties (other than gun control), massive spending and deficits (a Republican tradition since Reagan), massive expansion of government power, pro-open borders, and enthusiasm for foreign wars.
McCain’s erratic political history — spun as being a “maverick” — gave few signs of change to this mess, other than his steadfast enthusiasm for foreign wars.
As a result the party has almost no doctrinal coherence — what does it stand for?
The only strong, consistent policy is opposition to abortion — a long-term aspect of its platform that has over decades has had little impact on public policy.
Probably because of the strong public consensus for a position between the extreme views held by the two major parties.
Politically the party has alienated many of its core constituencies.
McCain’s long-held contempt for the “religious right”.
Bush Jr’s and McCain’s strong support for open borders –opposing one of the most strongly held beliefs of the party core.
Most of all, Bush Jr’s disastrous management of the domestic economy and our foreign wars.
Continue reading →
This entry was posted in Politics and tagged barack obama , barry goldwater , conservatism , democratic party , fred barnes , john mccain , lyndon johnson , republican party , rush limbaugh , sarah palin , william buckley on
2 November 2008
by Editor of the Fabius Maximus website .
Subscribe to the FM website!
Enter your email to receive email notices about new posts.
Subscribe to our RSS feed
RSS - Posts
Give a tip to Fabius Maximus:
Via PayPal
Archive by month
Archive by month
Categories
Categories
Search the FM website
Search for:
See us on social media
View FabiusMaximusWebsite’s profile on Facebook
View FabiusMaximus01’s profile on Twitter
The reference library
About the FM website
About the authors
Comments on the FM website
Contact us
Our Politics
Smackdowns – corrections & rebuttals
America – about the quiet coup
About inequality & social mobility
America’s Empire
Good news about America
Obama, his administration & policies
Politics in America
Reforming America: steps to new politics
Trump and the new Populism
Books about geopolitics
Demography: studies & reports
End of the post-WWII geopolitical regime
Financial crisis: how will this end?
About the great monetary policy experiment
Europe:  on the road to division or unification?
Food:  about this vital resource
Forecasts of futures for America & the World
Predictions revisited: hits & misses
The 3rd Industrial Revolution has begun
History: economic, military & geopolitical
Information & disinfo; new media & old
Nations: an index of posts by nation
Our military & national defense strategy
About our wars since 9/11
An Army near the Breaking Point: studies
Cyber-espionage and Cyber-war!
Goals and Benchmarks for our Iraq War
Intelligence agencies: how they work, & don’t
Iran – will the US or Israel attack Iran?
Military: strategic theory & practice
Modern warfare’s top experts – the library
Naval warfare and strategy
Studies & reports about our Wars
Peak Oil & Energy: posts
Peak oil & energy: Studies & reports
Science & Climate – FM articles
A history of fears about the climate
Anthropologists go to war.
Some revolt.
Important things about climate change
Science & climate: studies & reports
Science & climate: the media
Women and gender issues
Creative Commons License
The Fabius Maximus website is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .
We repost some copyrighted material with permission, noted at the open & close of these posts.
Blogroll
Alan Tonelson's RealityChek
Anthony Watts' (meterologist) website
AntiWar.com
Baffler
Blog of the Marine Corps Association
Bureau of Investigative Journalism
Chet Richard's Slightly East of New
Chuck Spinney's The Blaster
Gary Brecher, The War Nerd
George Magnus, economist
Information Dissemination
Interfluidity
Judith Curry's Climate Etc
Martin van Creveld's blog
Of Two Minds
OilPrice.com
Pando
Project on Government Oversight (POGO)
ProPublica – 21st century investigative journalism
Small Wars Journal
TomDispatch
William Lind's articles about WAR
Wolf Richter's WolfStreet
Zero Anthropology
Page views since Nov 2007
6,507,663
My Tweets
Authors of the FM website
Chet
don
Editor of the Fabius Maximus website
Tom Hayden
Joe Bonham
Marcus J. Ranum
GI Wilson
Tag cloud
afghanistan al qaeda assassination atomic weapons automation barack obama chet richards china cia climate change climate science coin conservatism constitution counterinsurgency debt democratic party election employment experts fear federal reserve financial crisis fiscal policy forecasts george friedman george w bush global warming government debt income inequality inflation internet iran iraq isis islam israel japan john boyd journalism justice learning left-wing locke peterseim marine corps gazette martin van creveld mexico mirror monetary policy nber new america officer corps oil ooda loop pakistan police political reform presidential election public opinion poll recession republican party right-wing robots russia stratfor tea party movement terrorism tom engelhardt truth unemployment us army us marine corps vietnam william lind women
The Twenty Twelve Theme .
Blog at WordPress.com.
Fabius Maximus website
Blog at WordPress.com.
The Twenty Twelve Theme .
Follow
Follow “Fabius Maximus website”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 1,607 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com