Feb
MAR
Apr
14
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
14 Mar 16 - 14 Mar 16
Close Help
Switch to the mobile version of this page.
Arkansas Times
Username /
View Profile /
Edit Profile /
Log Out
Log in to Comment /
Create Account
Log in to Digital Membership /
Subscribe
Digital Membership Active
Home
Blogs
Browse Blogs
Arkansas Blog
Rock Candy
Eat Arkansas
Eye Candy
Dining
Browse Dining
Dining Home
Dining Reviews
Eat Arkansas
Dining Feature
Restaurant Guide
Dining Archives
Home
Arkansas Blog
News
Browse News
News Home
Cover Story
Arkansas Reporter
Columns
The Big Picture
The Week That Was
The Observer
Eye on Arkansas
Cartoon
Letters
News Archives
Eat Arkansas
Rock Candy
Entertainment
Browse Entertainment
Entertainment Home
A&E Feature
To-Do List
In Brief
Movie Reviews
Music Reviews
Theater Reviews
A&E News
Art Notes
Pearls About Swine
Media
Calendar
Entertainment Archives
Latest Issue
Guides
Browse Guides
Restaurant Guide
Arkansas - Where Bold Nonprofits Work
Neighborhoods Guide
Cocktail Compass
Nurses Guide
Taco Truck Guide
Visitor's Guide 2014
Natives Guides
College Guide
Welcome Home 2014
Best Lawyers in Arkansas Guide
Women Entrepreneurs
Best Doctors in Central Arkansas
River Market Anniversary
Road Trip
Archives
Browse Archives
Cover Archives
Article Archives
Image Archives
Video Archives
Best Of Ark
Browse Best Of Ark
Best Of Arkansas
Best Restaurants
Toast Of The Town
Calendar
Food & Farm
Dining
Store
Contact / Subscribe
Browse Contact / Subscribe
Digital Membership Subscription
Digital Membership FAQ
Contact Information
Newspaper Subscription
Email News
RSS Feeds
Advertising Information
Academic All-Star Form
Podcasts
October 31, 2012 News » Letters
Tweet
Instapaper
Share
Favorite
Saving…
Comments            (2)
Email
ASU board deserves scrutiny
ASU board deserves scrutiny
According to the Arkansas Democrat-Gazette, it appears that the Arkansas State University Board allowed the reopening of an already accepted bid contract that was apparently well underway (although the percentage completion isn't noted) to make a change-order at ASU's request and also to protect a contractor's bad bid that underestimated the labor costs, the rising cost of steel, and somehow, missed the fact that they were bidding on a project on a slope.
These costs should not have been allowed to increase except for the "contractor protection" business in Jonesboro.
I guarantee that if the cost of steel had fallen, labor costs had dropped, or if somehow they had made an engineering error in their favor in the bid, they would not have gone to the ASU board and given them money back.
As one who built two plants in the $100 million range in different states and also did quite a few upgrades, I would have thought that the board would have separated the need for a new building into a new bid document, got a cost for it, and then seen what could be incorporated into the existing plans.
I would hope that the DFA auditors take a look at what amounts to a second item which should have been bid separately being shoe-horned into an existing contract, raising the costs 38 percent according to the ADG, and allowing a contractor to effectively raise the costs of the current contract above his low bid (which if done properly might have made them NOT the low bidder).
There is a lot of good ol' boy dealing going on here with my tax dollars.
I wonder if the board ever asked for a separate cost for the new building before allowing it plus everything else the contractor could slide into the cost into what they approved.
Everyone who has ever built anything, including houses, knows that change-orders allow the contractor to run up the bill and while they might be needed for a regulatory need, you must realize that unless the cost of doing it later is prohibitive, change it after the fact in a new bid document when others are also bidding and there is hopefully some competition.
Richard Boosey
Mount Vernon
Blame Eureka for 'Passion Play' struggle
"The Great Passion Play's" financial struggles are due to the City of Eureka's "Diversity Weekend," drag queen parades and Hell's Angel rallies with stabbings (just to name a few).
In fact, all of the liberal junk that happens in this city (disgusting art painted in the middle of town) has ruined a place that used to be a place that we could proudly bring our kids.
No more.
Keep this up and you will lose even more revenue; all of your shops will eventually close (more than the usual turn-over) and Eureka will be another ghost town.
City Council, this is a historical city that you are literally defacing!
This town has been around for hundreds of years and you are ruining it!
We can recall when "The Great Passion Play" drew in buses of people from churches all over the country.
Obviously, that is no longer happening.
Retirees have invested in land and homes in your county and they will soon sell and leave.
Wake up City of Eureka Springs!
You are destined to be a council that runs a wonderful and historical town down the drain.
Get over yourselves and think about the big picture.
You cannot stray from God and not pay the price.
Sue Spencer
Eureka Springs
Why no mention of Mexico?
Even with a clear dog in this year's hunt, I watched the final presidential debate with a good deal of disappointment, left again wondering why relations with Mexico are not front and center on the U.S. foreign policy radar.
Disappointingly, there was nary a mention from either candidate last night.
Unfortunately, I see Uncle Sam stuck in his outdated China and Mid-East dependency mindset for several more years to come.
Perhaps the next generation of American leaders will see how working with neighbors to improve our own side of the global street will be the best path forward if this country is to remain a global economic force in the 21st century.
Jeff B. Woodmansee
Little Rock
School meal standards
This fall when Arkansas school children got in line at the school cafeteria, they had better choices than ever before.
On the menu were a variety of foods and beverages recommended under new USDA school meal standards.
Changes in diet, however, can often take some time to adjust to.
So it was no surprise that some children initially complained of being hungrier than usual as they adjust to proper portion sizes and calorie amounts.
For instance, according to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, American school-aged children currently consume 50-240 percent more protein than they really need.
The new school meal standards are in line with nutritional requirements, rather than the current over-consumption that's helped to increase childhood obesity.
While it's true that some kids may need more food throughout the day (student athletes for instance), not every kid is a linebacker nor should they eat like one.
Parents can send their children to school with a snack or take advantage of after school snack or dinner programs.
Over the past three years the Arkansas Child Health Advisory Committee, designated by Act 1220 of 2003, has worked to remove trans fats from school food services and food items available during school hours.
These efforts along with the new USDA school meal standards will help the state of Arkansas provide healthier nutritional choices for children at school.
So kids and parents — don't give up on the new school meal standards.
Remembering to "eat your vegetables — and fruits" is not a necessary evil, it's a tasty way to get the nourishment you need to maintain a healthy weight and be successful in school.
And know that the efforts of many organizations across the state are working to help our students live a healthier life.
Jada Walker
Chair, Child Health Advisory Committee
Little Rock
Tweet
Instapaper
Share
Favorite
Saving…
Comments            (2)
Email
« Not funny   |   From the web »
more News »
More Letters »
Sort
Comments (2)
Showing 1-2 of 2
Add a comment
Subscribe to this thread:
By Email
Subscribing…
With RSS
Showing 1-2 of 2
Comment
Add a comment
Subscribe to this thread
Readers also liked…
2014 editors' picks
What's good, according to the Times staff.
by Max Brantley, Sam Eifling, Clayton Gentry, Benjamin Hardy, David Koon, Lindsey Millar, Leslie Newell Peacock, David Ramsey and Will Stephenson
Jul 30, 2014
Restoring the Little Red, and more
The Nature Conservancy at work in Clinton, other parts of Arkansas.
by Benjamin Hardy
Dec  4, 2014
Nightwise
The Observer, Arkansas Times shutterbug extraordinare Brian Chilson and newsroom FNG Benjamin Hardy slunk from our bedchambers over the weekend to hit the late-night bars like Midtown Billiards, Discovery and Electric Cowboy for an upcoming cover story in advance of a City Board vote on whether to shutter the Class B permitted clubs at 2 a.m. instead of 5.
Mr. Hardy and The Observer's sometime frienemy David Koon will be making the case that the 5 a.m. clubs are actually a good thing for Little Rock.
Aug  7, 2014
Most Shared
In judgment: court elections
Arkansas voters filled two seats on the Arkansas Supreme Court last week in an exercise that again made the case against election of judges.
Racial remark leads to Fort Smith police chief's resignation
A racial remark has led to the resignation of Fort Smith Police Chief Kevin Lindsey, the Southwest Times Record newspaper in Fort Smith reports.
Cats and dogs
In the popular imagination, there are dog people and cat people, although one rarely encounters them in real life.
Spat between Treasurer Milligan and lawyer won't produce criminal charges
The combatants in the tussle between Treasurer Dennis Milligan and lawyer Luther Sutter apparently have decided not to pursue competing misdemeanor charges of assault.
Judge denies Mike Maggio request to withdraw guilty plea
Federal Judge Brian Miller today denied former Circuit Judge Mike Maggio's request to withdraw a plea of guilty to a charge that he accepted a bribe to reduce the verdict in a nursing home negligence case.
Latest in
Legislators: Embrace home care for elderly
Advice for Arkansas legislators: Never get old.
Mar 10, 2016
Sanders' message
Why do so many insist Bernie Sanders is offering freebies to Americans?
Mar  3, 2016
Leadership and corruption
Early voting has started and the March 1 primary is coming up fast.
Feb 25, 2016
More »
Event Calendar
« »
March
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
Events Movies Music Art Theater
Most Recent Comments
Re: Arkansas Republican leaders are wary of Trump, but few reject him outright
Who ever the Republican nominee is, it will be better than having another 4 years…
Posted by Conservative Arkansan
on March 13, 2016
Re: Arkansas Republican leaders are wary of Trump, but few reject him outright
If after last night and to nights exhibition of the trump rallies the ARkansas republician…
Posted by Cecil Dale
on March 12, 2016
Re: A new abortion provider
Nice post.
Thanks for sharing such a nice post.
Mifeprex is best abortion pill used…
Posted by Mary Adam
on March 12, 2016
Site Index
News
Cover Story / Arkansas Reporter / The Week That Was / The Observer / Editorial / Max Brantley / Ernest Dumas / Gene Lyons / Jay Barth / Words / Guest Writer / Letters
Entertainment
A&E Feature / To-Do List / In Brief / Movie Reviews / Music Reviews / Theater Reviews / A&E News / Art Notes / Media / Dining Reviews / Dining Guide / Calendar / Gallery Listings
This Week's Cover
View This Week's Print Edition
Archives
West Memphis Three
Contact
Staff
Advertising
Subscribe
Get Email News
Submit A Letter
Automotive
Quick Links
Special Publications
Road Trip Arkansas
El Latino
Savvy Kids
Best Lawyers
Nurses Guide
College Guide
Heights/Hillcrest
Academic All-Star Form
Home |
Arkansas Blog |
News |
Entertainment |
Dining |
Video |
Tips |
Submit a Listing |
Academic All Star Form |
Contact |
Privacy Policy
RSS
Facebook
Twitter
© 2016    Arkansas Times | 201 East Markham, Suite 200, Little Rock, AR 72201
Powered by Foundation