APR
MAY
JUL
7
2015
2016
2017
13 captures
19 Jun 15 - 12 Oct 16
Close Help
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
Edward II
Article
Web sites
King of England
Written by: The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica
Share:
Read
View History
Edit
Feedback
Alternative title: Edward of Caernarvon
Edward II
king of England
Also known as
Edward of Caernarvon
born
April 25, 1284
Caernarfon , Wales
died
September 1327
Berkeley , England
Edward II, byname Edward of Caernarvon (born April 25, 1284, Caernarvon, Caernarvonshire, Wales —died September 1327, Berkeley, Gloucestershire , Eng.)
king of England from 1307 to 1327.
Although he was a man of limited capability, he waged a long, hopeless campaign to assert his authority over powerful barons.
The fourth son of King Edward I , he ascended the throne upon his father’s death (July 7, 1307) and immediately gave the highest offices to Edward I’s most prominent opponents.
He earned the hatred of the barons by granting the earldom of Cornwall to his frivolous favourite (and possible lover), Piers Gaveston .
In 1311 a 21-member baronial committee drafted a document—known as the Ordinances —demanding the banishment of Gaveston and the restriction of the King’s powers over finances and appointments.
Edward pretended to give in to these demands; he sent Gaveston out of the country but soon allowed him to return.
In retaliation the barons seized Gaveston and executed him (June 1312).
Edward had to wait 11 years to annul the Ordinances and avenge Gaveston.
Meanwhile, the Scottish king Robert I the Bruce was threatening to throw off English overlordship.
Edward led an army into Scotland in 1314 but was decisively defeated by Bruce at Bannockburn on June 24.
With one stroke, Scotland’s independence was virtually secured, and Edward was put at the mercy of a group of barons headed by his cousin Thomas of Lancaster , who by 1315 had made himself the real master of England.
Nevertheless, Lancaster proved to be incompetent; by 1318 a group of moderate barons led by Aymer de Valence, earl of Pembroke, had assumed the role of arbitrators between Lancaster and Edward.
At this juncture Edward found two new favourites— Hugh le Despenser and his son and namesake.
When the king supported the younger Despenser’s territorial ambitions in Wales, Lancaster banished both Despensers.
Edward then took up arms on their behalf.
His opponents fell out among themselves, and he defeated and captured Lancaster at Boroughbridge, Yorkshire, in March 1322.
Soon afterward, he had Lancaster executed.
At last free of baronial control, Edward revoked the Ordinances.
His reliance on the Despensers, however, soon aroused the resentment of his queen, Isabella .
While on a diplomatic mission to Paris in 1325, she became the mistress of Roger Mortimer , an exiled baronial opponent of Edward.
In September 1326 the couple invaded England, executed the Despensers, and deposed Edward in favour of his son, who was crowned (January 1327) King Edward III .
Edward II was imprisoned and, according to the traditional account, died in September 1327, probably by violence.
In the first decade of the 21st century, however, some historians suggested that Edward’s death was staged and that he probably survived until 1330.
Share
Share:
Email
Print
Cite
Feedback
Corrections?
Updates?
Help us improve this article!
Contact our editors with your Feedback .
To propose your own edits, go to Edit Mode .
You may also be interested in...
John de Warenne, 7th earl of Surrey
John de Warenne, 8th earl of Surrey
Oliver Cromwell
William III
Robert I
Sir James Douglas
Edward I
Sir William Wallace
Thomas Randolph, 1st earl of Moray
James Douglas, 2nd earl of Douglas
Charles I
Charles II
Keep exploring
Structures of Government: Fact or Fiction?
History of Warfare
Weapons and Warfare
Our Days Are Numbered: 7 Crazy Facts About Calendars
The Six Deadliest Earthquakes since 1950
Email this page
Cancel
Send
Britannica Stories
In The News / Society
North Korea’s First Party Congress in 36 Years
Demystified / Animals
What’s the Difference Between Alligators and Crocodiles?
Spotlight / Science
Transit of Mercury
See All Stories
BRITANNICA QUIZZES
Indianapolis 500
Lemurs: Fact or Fiction?
Insect Wings: Fact or Fiction?
See More Quizzes
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
©2016 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Citations
MLA style:
"Edward II".
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016.
Web.
07 Mai.
2016
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Edward-II-king-of-England>.
APA style:
Edward II.
(2016).
In Encyclopædia Britannica.
Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/biography/Edward-II-king-of-England
Harvard style:
Edward II.
2016.
Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Retrieved 07 Mai, 2016, from http://www.britannica.com/biography/Edward-II-king-of-England
Chicago Manual of Style:
Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "Edward II", accessed Mai 07, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/biography/Edward-II-king-of-England.
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Update
Link
Click anywhere inside the article to add text or insert superscripts, subscripts, and special characters.
You can also highlight a section and use the tools in this bar to modify existing content:
Add links to related Britannica articles!
You can double-click any word or highlight a word or phrase in the text below and then select an article from the search box.
Or, simply highlight a word or phrase in the article, then enter the article name or term you'd like to link to in the search box below, and select from the list of results.
Note: we do not allow links to external resources in editor.
Please click the Web sites link for this article to add citations for
external Web sites.
Editing Tools:
Tips for Editing
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles.
You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind:
Encyclopaedia Britannica articles are written in a neutral, objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context.
(Internet URLs are best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval.
Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
MEDIA FOR:
Edward II
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email.
Try again later.
×