+ / -
(SU 75885963) Bramshill House (NR).  (1)
Bramshill House was built between 1605-12 for Edward, Lord Zouche of Harringworth. It was built on an old site and incorporates a certain amount of earlier work. In the vaults beneath the southernmost tower the construction compares with vaulting in the Steward's room and servants' hall at Windsor, which are dated to the latter half of the 14th century. The gatehouse still exists embodied in the NE. front of Bramshill and access to the inner court is yet gained through Foxley's arches.
The southern vaulting clearly formed part of the undercroft of a great hall which lay parallel to the gatehouse with a courtyard between. In other parts of the present entrance-front walls of great thickness have been found.
C.1467 this house seems to have fallen into disrepair and its history is obscure until 'lodge' is mentioned at Bramshill in 1595.
The Jacobean house had an entrance originally flanked by wings, one being destroyed by fire, c.1640 and the other removed 1695-1703. Foundations of wings have also been found at the east front.  (2)
"Extensive alterations have recently been made to the house, and much of the pre-Jacobean work has been destroyed. The foundations of wings have been found in digging drains on the W. front of the house".
The building, still known as Bramshill House, is now a Police College.  (3)
Bramshill House: a somewhat reduced and patched Jacobean mansion but outstanding both visually and architecturally. The W. garden contains two contemporary ornamental towers. For a park here see SU 76 SE 12.  (4)
No change.  (5)
Bramshill House (1605-12) is a large Jacobean house of outstanding architectural interest. It is built entirely of brick and has three storeys. Grade 1.
It has symmetrical elevations and a narrow interior court. There are two storeys to the north and east elevations, three to the south and three above cellars to the west, all arranged below a single roof line. The roof is covered in red tiles, and is generally hipped but has large gables on the west side. There are grouped diagonal flues on rectangular chimney stacks. The house is built from red brick with stone dressings which include a pierced stone balustrade parapet on the three main fronts, weathering bands, mullion and transom windows, arcaded openings to each end of the eastern terrace and an elaborate entrance feature. The south entrance front has a recessed centre, an elaborate projecting three storey stone porch and flanking wings that are each three windows wide and which date to 1703.
Very little of the previous house remains on the site, apart from sections of the walls in the east wing. (6-8)
Additional bibliography.    (9)
Bramshill Park. RG listed grade II*. (10)
In 1960 Bramshill House became the permanent home of the principal police staff training college in the UK. Since April 2007 it has also housed part of the National Policing Improvement Agency, a body established to provide police with support and expertise in areas that include serious crime analysis and the development of new policing technologies. (11)
From 2009 Bramshill House will be undergoing a refurbishment programme which is due for completion in 2014. (12)
SOURCE TEXT