compartments are here given at large, together with sections of the
mouldings and pendants.
Plate XXVII.
Friezes carved in Oak, in the North Chamber of
a House at Yarmouth, the Residence of C. J. Palmer, Esq.
F. S. A.
Date 1596.
— This chamber adjoins the Drawing-room before described,
and is eighteen feet square in its dimension.
The walls are panelled
with oak.
The Chimney-piece is equally elegant in its design with that
of the drawing-room, and is engraved amongst the illustrations to the
Account of the House by Mr. Palmer.
The carvings shown on this
Plate, represent the central and one of the side panels of the entabla-
ture over the lower columns of the chimney-piece.
Both consist of a
scroll and strap pattern, in which bunches of fruits are introduced.
e
Plate XXVIII.
A Chimne'ij -piece in the Great Hall at Hard-
wick Hall, Derbyshire, the Seat of his Grace the Duke of Devonshire,
K. G. Date 1597.
— ^Havdwick Hall stands in a fine park, adorned by
venerable oaks, and upon a very high ridge of ground, commanding a
most extensive and delightful prospect into the adjacent country, more
especially towards the west.
The mansion was built in 1597, by
Elizabeth, Countess of Shrewsbury, daughter of John Hardwick, Esq.
This lady had been married twice before she became the wife of the
Earl of Shrewsbury, first to Robert Bailey, Esq. and Sir WiUiam
Cavendish, and it was not till after the death of her first two husbands,
that she erected this stately edifice.
There are very few mansions like
Hardwick, which give so clear and complete an idea of the architec-
tural taste of the times in which it was built ; and by the singular o-ood
taste of the possessors, it has been suffered to remain in its primitive state,
with much of the ancient furniture, to this day.
Over this Chimney-
piece in the Great Hall, is a beautiful arabesque compartment of very
large size, in which is fully displayed the armorial achievement of the
Countess of Shrewsbury ; the lozenge-formed shield is charged with a
saltier engrailed, and in chief three roses, her paternal arms of Hard-
wick, as now quartered by the present Duke ; the supporters are two
hinds, each collared, the whole painted and emblazoned.
In the Great
Hall is the history of Patient Grizel, in old tapestry, and in the gallery
is a very curious collection of portraits of distinguished characters.
Plate XXIX.
The principal Elevation of Bramshill House, in
Hampshire, the Seat of Sir John Cope, Bart.
Date 1603.
— ^Brams-
hill House is in the parish of Eversley, on the borders of Berkshire and
Surrey, at a short distance from Hartford Bridge : its situation is open
and commanding, and as a specimen of Elizabethan architecture, merits
particular attention, exhibiting all the stateliness for wliich the period
referred to was remarkable, with a suite of apartments both large and
lofty.
The amplitude of its dimensions indicate a princely residence,
and it is traditionally reported to have been erected for the highlv
accomplished and amiable Henry Frederick, Prince of Wales, the
DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.
35
eldest son of King James I. who died at the age of eighteen, in the
year 1612.
Bramshill House was the residence of Edward, Lord
Zouch, of Harringworth, a nobleman highly favoured by King James,
who appointed him Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Constable
of Dover Castle.
Bramshill Park is not large, but there is an historical anecdote con-
nected with it, which gives the spot some interest.
Dr. George Abbot,
Archbishop of Canterbury, who took an active part in all the great
transactions of state, when in a declining state of health, used in the
summer to retire into Hampshire for the sake of recreation, and had
accepted an invitation from Lord Zouch to hunt the fallow deer in his
park at Bramshill.
During the enjoyment of his sport, he one day
accidentally killed that nobleman's keeper by an arrow from a crossbow,
which he had aimed at one of the herd.
This misfortune threw the
Archbishop into a deep melancholy, and the prelate ever afterwards
kept a monthly fast on Tuesday, the day on which this fatal accident
happened.
The Archbishop's conduct was submitted to inquiry, but it
did not lessen him in the King's favour, who observed, " that an angel
might have miscarried in this sort," and accordingly his Majesty granted
him pardon, and declared him still capable of all the authority of a
primate.
In the reign of Charles I. Bramshill House was partly destroyed by
fire, a circumstance which is noticed by Fuller.
In 1673, it was the
residence of Sir Andrew Henley, Bart., but has been for a considerable
time the property of the family of the present possessor, one of which
built the mansion at Kensington, now called Holland House.
Plate XXX.
The Oriel Window in the Western Elevation of
Bramshill House, in Hampshire.
Date 1603.
— In the architecture of
Bramshill House, is to be observed the attempt at Italian improvement,
then newly introduced.
The main building, three stories in height and
about one hundred and forty feet in extent, is constructed with brick,
with stone dressings to the numerous large and lofty windows ; the
quoins also are of stone, and the whole is surmounted by an open
carved parapet of the same material.
The central compartment of the
36 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.
principal front, about twenty feet in width, is built wholly with stone,
and displays a profusion of ornamental decoration, including the very
fine Oriel Window shown on the Plate.
This portion of the building,
an interesting architectural specimen, is earned up with terminal pilasters
of the Doric, Ionic, and Corinthian style, from story to story, and is
surmounted by a florid pediment which is perforated.
The Oriel, or compas Window, in the centre of the front, is sin-
gularly beautiful in design, with much lightness and elegance in its
details.
This species of window is one of the most ornamental features
in the exterior of a building, and equally cheerful in the interior.
In
the instance here given, the beauty of its proportions renders it an
example particularly worthy of attention.
Plate XXXI.
The Elevation of the Eastern Side of Bramshill
House, in Hampshire.
Date 1603,— This front towards the east,
exhibits comparatively little ornament, but shows that general unifor-
mity in design was preserved, even although it was necessary for
internal convenience to vary the situation and size of particular
windows.
In the centre of this front is a bold projection, in which is
the arch of entrance, and above it a bay window.
This projection, like
the rest of the building, is crowned with an ornamental pierced parapet,
and the whole is surmounted by a large gable, containing a recessed
niche and statue of King James I.
This front is about one hundred
and twenty-four feet in extent, and two stories in height,
Plate XXXII.
The Elevation of the Southern Side of Bramshill
House, in Hampshire.
Date 1603.
— The extent of this front is about
one hundred and ninety-three feet, and in height, to the top of the
parapet, forty-six feet : its principal feature, and most important dif-
ference from the other fronts of this noble building, is a terrace twenty-
five feet in width between the projecting wings, a kind of architectural
fore-ground to the garden, which is extremely beautiful.
The terrace is
bounded by a balustrade, and the general effect is very striking.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.
37
Plate XXXIII.
Balustrades, from the Deanerij at Lincoln, and
from Bramshill House.
Date 1603.
— The first subject of this Plate
is a very beautiful crest or ornamental parapet of the Deanery House
at Lincoln, rising three feet above the building, constructed about the
same period as Bramshill House.
The second example shown is the pierced parapet, which crowns
the whole of the house at Bramshill.
The height of the parapet is
three feet seven inches, and the small piers, about fourteen inches in
width, are about four feet five inches distant from each other : the effect
of the pierced work between them is very fine: a more light and
elegant parapet is rarely found, even in the compositions of the best
Italian architects.
The parapet, a great improvement to the elevation,
is an architectural feature that in the Elizabethan era was much varied,
but for simplicity of design it would be difficult to produce a finer
instance.
The balusters of the terrace at Bramshill, which form the remaining
example, are excellent in their proportions, and well adapted to the
purpose for which they are applied.
The height of the balustrade is
three feet three inches.
Plate XXXIV.
The Arcade at Bramshill House, in Hampshire.
Date 1603.
— The Arcade on the terrace of the southern front is here
shown : it is a feature of domestic architecture, borrowed from Italy,
where the terrace answered the purpose of exercise, and became an
important accessory to every villa.
In the present design, it may be
objected by the classical architect that the imposts of the arches rest
upon the pillars, and convey an appearance of instability.
This idea
has been combated by Mr. Woods, in his " Letters of an Architect,"
who admits that the judgment does not easily reconcile itself to arches
upon columns or on posts, for a column is only an ornamented stone
post, but he confesses that there is a delightful hghtness and airiness
of effect produced by the distribution, difficult to be obtained by other
means.
The enrichments of the arcade at Bramshill are extremely
pleasing.
The order intended is Doric ; but in this instance it is made
38 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.
to assume all the lightness of the Ionic : the trigh-phs and ornamented
metopes, together with the simple capitals of the columns, are the only
distinctions by which the identity of the order is determined.
Plate XXXV.
The Stone Screen in the Hall at Bramshill House,
in Hampshire.
Date 1603.
— The Screen, at the lower end of the
ancient halls, was a necessary arrangement, to mask the entrances from
the offices, and much embellishment was usually lavished upon it.
In
ruder times it was customary to inscribe this part of the mansion with
notices of invitation and welcome to the hospitality then ostentatiously
exhibited; as at Halnaker House, in Sussex, now belonging to the
Duke of Richmond, where the doors are labelled with the words, " Le
Bien Venue," and " Come in and drinke," coarsely carved.
The screen
at Bramshill bears numerous shields, seemingly intended for emblazon-
ment of the arms of the neighbouring gentry, who might be welcome to
the spread of good cheer inseparable from the domestic establishment
of a large mansion.
The simple inscription at Montacute House, in
Somersetshire, " And yours, my friends," answered the same benevo-
lent purpose as the emblazoned frieze at GilHng Castle, where the
members of every division of the county of York are separately distin-
guished by their family insignia.
The height of the screen in the hall
at Bramshill is thirteen feet, and the depth of the entablature, con-
taining a double row of sculptured shields, is two feet six inches.
In
the spandrils of the arches are introduced small female figures, one in
each, emblematical of Justice and Wisdom, Industry and Plenty.
The
order intended in this enriched portion of the hall is Corinthian ; but the
architectural features are so modified by the exuberance of decoration
as to be scarcely perceptible.
A section of the Screen is given on the
same Plate, by which its relative thickness may be determined ; and in
the details the arabesque ornaments of the sculptured shields are shown
at laro;e.
Plate XXXVI.
The side of the Drawing-room at Bramshill
House, in Hampshire.
Date 1603.
— In the mansions of our old no-
bility, the next room, in point of importance to the hall, was the guest-
DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.
39
chamber, into which the company retired, sometimes called the drawing-
room, a name abbreviated from withdrawing room : the phrase is
generally supposed to be of more modern date ; but in the age of
Elizabeth, Whetstone, in his Heptameron says, " The queene sent for
the chosen company who were placed in the drawinge chamber :"
proving the use of the term, even before the torrent of puritanical zeal
had subdued ancient splendour, and French taste had been introduced
in the reig-n of Charles II.
The drawing-room at Bramshill is lighted by four bay windows of
different sizes ; and to its whole height, about sixteen feet, is panelled
with oak, the ribs or styles being carved, and the surface of the panel
left plain.
The frieze is a beautiful design of a running pattern of
foliage and fruit, which is shown at large on the next Plate, together
with the mouldings and size of the panels.
The richness occasioned by
the variations from uniformity of surface in these large rooms is very
striking.
Plate XXXVII.
The Details at large of the Drawing-room and
Library at Bramshill House, Hampshire.
Date 1603.
— The first
subject of this Plate is one of the upper panels of the Drawing-room,
surmounted by its beautiful Corinthian entablature, in the frieze of
which are introduced the fig, the grape, and the pomegranate, each
with its appropriate foliage and blossoms ; the architrave rests on den-
tils, and the frieze is overshadowed by a bold modillioned cornice
slightly enriched with carving.
One of the lower panels, part of the dado in the same room, is
also shown on this Plate, with a section of the projecting mouldings.
The upper panel is two feet ten inches, by two feet four inches in
dimension ; the lower, two feet seven inches, by two feet six inches.
The plaster frieze in the Library, of a very elegant arabesque
pattern, quite in the Florentine taste, is nineteen inches in width.
The
workmanship is excellent, and shows the great perfection the art of
plastering had attained.
Plate XXXVIII.
Ceilings at Bramshill House, in Hampshire.
Bate 1603.
— The Ceilings at Bramshill are not less characteristic of
the Elizabethan period than the other architectural parts of the man-
sion ; those of the old Library and Drawing-room have been selected
as excellent examples, and it is not often that such fine specimens
have been preserved.
The designs, which aiford a pleasing variety,
are so well arranged, that but Httle of the plain surface is left, and the
compositions, abundantly ornamented, are managed with all the skill
necessary to produce a light and elegant effect.
Plate XXXIX.
The Chimney-piece in the Drawing-room at
Bramshill House, in Hampshire.
Date 1603.
— The massive appear-
ance of this Chimney-piece is not injudiciously contrasted with the
lighter panelling and richly worked ceiling of the same apartment : it
is altogether executed in a more solid and less ornamental style of art.
The design is classical, and after the manner .
of Vignola : it compre-
hends two stories in height; the lower being Doric, and the upper
Ionic.
The distribution of the members is pure and regular; the
columns, with their capitals and entablature, are well suited to each
other, and the whole is surmounted by a sculptured pediment, which
lises to the cornice of the room.
The shafts of the columns are of
variegated marble ; and the upper compartment of the chimney-piece
is composed of separate pieces of the same diversified material, disposed
in a manner rather formal, over the surface.
The frieze of the upper
order is also formed of coloured marble in the centre ; and over the
columns, the entablature is broken, which considerably relieves the
effect, and preserves the appearance of solidity produced by the bold
relief given to the several parts.
The basement seems almost too low
for the order above it.
The fire-place, six feet in width, is four feet
eight inches high, and retains the ancient andirons, or dogs, used for
burnmg wood : these are of the larger sort, and are much ornamented,
particularly at the low^er part.
A profile of the projection of the
Chimney-piece is shown on the Plate.
DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.
41
Plate XL.
The Side of the Drawing-room at Stockton House, in
Wiltshire, the Seat of Harry Biggs, Esq.
Date 1610.
— Stockton
House is situated in a deep valley on the banks of the river Wily, which
joins the Nadder, and forms an important branch of the upper Avon ; it
is about six miles north-eastward from the town of Hindon, near the
beautiful downs for which its vicinity is celebrated.
The mansion was
built about the year 1610, by John Topp, Esq., one of the ancestors of
Francis Topp, who was created Baronet by King Charles II.
in 1688.
The Drawing-room may be pronounced one of the best examples of
interior decoration in the Elizabethan style now remaining in Wiltshire,
and the more iiiteresting from the very excellent preservation in which
its ornamental features are carefully maintained.
In length this beautiful apartment is thirty-three feet eight inches,
and in breadth, exclusive of a large oriel at the upper end, it is twenty
feet two inches : in height the room is not more than eleven feet.
It is
situated in one of the angles of the mansion, and is lighted on two of its
sides by large bay windows.
The oriel, or deep recess, at the upper
end of the room, is above eight feet square, and the bays of its fine
transom window contain some armorial compartments in stained glass.
The chimney-piece, shown in the plate, is two stories in height ; both are
of the Corinthian order, and the coupled columns of the lower story
surmount a pedestal.
In the ornaments of the frieze and the upper
compartments of the chimney-piece, invention has produced a variety of
arabesque forms.
The whole apartment is panelled with fine oak, in
small panels, with bold and simple mouldings ; on the walls no surbase
is indicated, but the Corinthian pilasters are raised on very high
pedestals, which are enriched on the upper parts by carved ornaments,
taking the form of small arches, their spandrils and centres filled with
arabesques.
The pilasters support a highly decorated frieze, or mo-
dillioned cornice, which, as well as the pedestal, is shown at large on
the Plate.
Within the apartment, at the lower end, a most beautiful
porch of carved oak is introduced, which was evidently so placed to
break the force of cold air issuing from the door.
This highly enriched
portion of the room is surmounted by figures of Diana, Minerva, and
F
Apollo.
The ceiling of this apartment is not less ornamental than its
walls ; it is divided into large compartments of a florid pattern, having
small pendants at the intersections ; the interstices of the ribs are filled
with foliage, and with various attributes of rural life, swans and fishes,
the wild boar, hounds, deer, &c. Few examples are now to be found of
more interest to the architect than this splendid room at Stockton, the
decorations of which have never been disturbed by the fickle taste of
intervening proprietors, since its foundation.
Plate XLI.
The centre Compartment of the Arcade at Hatfield
House, Hertfordshire, the Seat of the Marquess of Salisbury.
Date
1611.
— Hatfield House is situated on an eminence, commanding views
in every direction of an undulated country, equally remarkable for its
natural beauty and excessive fertility ; the park is watered by the river
Lea, and is distant six miles from St. Alban's, and seven from Heitford.
This house is perhaps the very first in the kingdom where a view of
landscape scenery was considered in the design : its situation possesses
great advantages to recommend the choice, the ground rising with a
gentle ascent : the mansion on every side presents itself as a noble and
commanding object.
The architects, John Thorp, Bernard Jansen,
Gerard Christmas, Robert and John Smithson, and Nicholas Stone,
were all in high repute at the time Hatfield House was erected ; and it
is rather singular that a building which displays a combination of archi-
tecture on such a magnificent scale, and has attracted much admiration
on account of the grandeur and beauty of its proportions, should have
remained so long without the architect's name being known ; but to
none of the great names of that interesting period, which are extant,
has the merit of this excellent design yet been attributed.
There is
certainly enough of the Florentine manner in the beautiful arcade on
the southern front, to induce an opinion that the design was procured
from Italy, but no proof can be obtained that such was really the case.
The two wings on the principal front of Hatfield House, are con-
nected by a magnificent centre, raised with two orders of architecture ;
and with its entrance porch, which is highly enriched, may be con-
sidered as the most commanding feature of the edifice.
The basement
DESCRIPTION OF THE PLATES.
43
Story comprises an arcade or corridor, extending the whole length
between the wings, and constructed upon the Italian plan, affording
means of exercise in the air, but sheltered from the sun or rain.
The
Doric order adopted in this arcade, agrees with the proportions used
by San Gallo, of Florence, and other Italian masters; the shafts,
resting on pedestals, are partly fluted and partly covered with arabesque
ornament.
The tower, Mhich is over the central compartment of the
arcade, rises to the height of seventy feet, and is divided into three
stories, having a bold projection which breaks the uniform line of the
front.
The second story of the tower is of the Ionic order, and the
third Corinthian ; in the last are sculptured the full armorial bearings of
the noble founder of the mansion.
The parapet is pierced \\dth the date
of the year at the completion of the building, 1611, and above that are
his lordship's armorial crest and coronet.
Plate XLII.
A Compartment in the Upper Storij of the South
Front of Hatfield House.
Date 1611.
— Hatfield House occupies a
grand parallelogram two hundred and eighty feet in length, and seventy
feet in width.
On the southern fi-ont, two wings project at right angles,
each one hundred feet, with a breadth of eighty feet, forming together,
with the centre division, three sides of a court, one hundred and forty feet
in extent, the extreme length of the fi-ont being three hundred feet.
The material of which the mansion is constructed, is principally brick,
but the cases and mullions of the windows, the Ionic pilasters and
architectural enrichments, as well as all the prominent parts most
exposed to injuiy, are of stone.
In these the destructive effect of time
is scarcely perceptible, while it has given the whole the mellow pictu-
resque character of age; the weather-stained and mossy bricks har-
monizing admirably with the gray hue of the stone, tad wath the
surrounding landscape.
It is also behoved that no house in the king-
dom, erected at so early a date, remains so perfectly entire as this.
The elevation possesses perfect unity of design and execution, in which
the chaste and vigorous feeling, characteristic of the Elizabethan period,
is remarkably prevalent.
The windows of the upper story, which give
hght to the long gallery, are square-headed and mullioned, and are
44 ELIZABETHAN ARCHITECTURE.
admirably proportioned to the spaces between the Ionic pilasters, here
introduced to relieve the plainness of the surface.
The entablature
charged with arabesque ornament, is surmounted by an elegantly
pierced paraj^et, at the height of fifty feet from the ground.
Hatfield Plouse forms one of the subjects in Mr. Robinson's Vitruvius
Britannicus, but the details now shown are not given in that valuable
work ; amongst the illustrations, is, however, a most beautiful view of the
gallery to which these windows belong; the length of this gallery
is one hundred and sixty-three feet, but notwithstanding its extreme
length and richness of architectural character, the eng-ravino- is finished
with accuracy, while the general peculiarity of effect is at the same
time admirably preserved.
Plate XLIII.
Details of Hatfield House, Hertfordshire.
Date
1611.
— The subjects of this Plate are : 1.
The upper part of one of the
corner turrets of the wings.
2.
One of the windows of the upper story
of the wings, the entablature, the lead pipes, and plan of the oriel
window on the front.
3.
The pierced parapet on the principal facade.
The large square corner turrets of the wings, are fifty-two feet
six inches in height, to the top of the cornice, and are crowned by
cupola formed roofs, covered with lead, rising thirteen feet to the top of
the ball on the pinnacles ; these are terminated by gilded vanes, orna-