Mar
APR
May
2
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
2 Apr 16 - 2 Apr 16
Close Help
About Cookies
We want you to enjoy your visit to our website.  That's why we use cookies to enhance your experience. By staying on our website you agree to our use of cookies.
More info about cookies.
Accept & close
Business Directory Local Info Dating Buy Sell Book an Ad
Search
Enter your search below:
Register | Sign In
Winchester 11.6°c
News Sport Your Say Family What's On Jobs Property Announcements Cars More
News Winchester Eastleigh Alresford Bishop's Waltham Villages Chronicle Mobile Crime Education Politics Business Traffic In Depth National News
Register Sign In
Home News Sport Jobs Most popular UK news Send us your news Cars Traffic & travel Business Directory Property Announcements Dating Desktop site
MEP wants police college shut over funding 'abuse'
Marta Andreasen, a UKIP MEP for South East England
/ Chris Gregory , News Editor / @CGregoryGazette
Share:
1 comment
A EUROPEAN police training centre near Hook should close after abuses of EU funding, an MEP has claimed.
Marta Andreasen, a UKIP MEP for South East England, wants the EU to stop funding the European Police College (Cepol), which has been based at Bramshill House, in Mansion Drive, near Hook, since   2006.
Her call comes after the European Parliament’s Budgetary Control Committee refused to sign off Cepol’s accounts for 2008, after a report allegedly showed that more than £20,000 of EU money had been   used to buy furniture and mobile phones for staff members’ private use.
Ms Andreasen told The Gazette : “This college should be beyond reproach because they educate policemen. The ethics should be very   high.
“The fact that they have used EU funding for their own private purposes really puts a question mark on the office of the college. My recommendation is that the college should be closed.”
Cepol was set up in 2006 at Bramshill House, a 17th century Grade I-listed building that is also separately the home of the UK’s National Policing Improvement Agency.
The EU currently spends 8million euros a year on Cepol, which runs courses for police officers from across Europe to promote good practice and help fight cross-border crime.
But 18 months ago, the European Parliament refused to sign off the accounts for the college for 2008 after concerns about spending practices.
Last month, the EU Budgetary Control Committee refused to approve the accounts for a second time, claiming that improvements in accounting had not been made.
The matter will now go before the full European Parliament for members to decide on the accounts.
Share:
1 comment
Promoted stories
Most popular
See more stories
Most popular
See more stories
Comments
Places2Fish 3:08pm Sat 9 Oct 10
This is how the EU works, bribery and corruption, pay off's and scams. Treats for councillors, MP's, MEP's, establishment figures, public bodies, private organisations, the media, clubs and federations etc. they suck them in, functions, luncheons, free gifts and under the counter payments, wink wink. What they expect in return is the loss of our democracy, freedom and liberty, you don't think so, believe me its already started. We are no longer governed by the people we elect, their powers are now limit, we are now governed by bureaucrats accountable to no one and the more power you, by saying nothing, give them, the more they will take away.
This is how the EU works, bribery and corruption, pay off's and scams.  Treats for councillors, MP's, MEP's, establishment figures, public bodies, private organisations, the media, clubs and federations etc. they suck them in, functions, luncheons, free gifts and under the counter payments, wink wink.  What they expect in return is the loss of our democracy, freedom and liberty, you don't think so, believe me its already started.  We are no longer governed by the people we elect, their powers are now limit, we are now governed by bureaucrats accountable to no one and the more power you, by saying nothing, give them, the more they will take away. Places2Fish
This is how the EU works, bribery and corruption, pay off's and scams. Treats for councillors, MP's, MEP's, establishment figures, public bodies, private organisations, the media, clubs and federations etc. they suck them in, functions, luncheons, free gifts and under the counter payments, wink wink. What they expect in return is the loss of our democracy, freedom and liberty, you don't think so, believe me its already started. We are no longer governed by the people we elect, their powers are now limit, we are now governed by bureaucrats accountable to no one and the more power you, by saying nothing, give them, the more they will take away.
Report
Score: 0
Next Up
Mobile site
Contact Us
Subscribe
Photo Sales
Advertise
AdChoices
Archive
Topics
Announcements
Site Map
Exchange and Mart
Dating
Leap
Terms & Conditions
Contributor Terms
Cookie Policy
Privacy Policy
©Copyright 2001-2015
This site is part of Newsquest's audited local newspaper network | A Gannett Company
Newsquest Media (Southern) Ltd, Loudwater Mill, Station Road, High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire. HP10 9TY|1350|Registered in England & Wales
Ipsoregulated
This website and associated newspapers adhere to the Independent Press Standards Organisation's Editors' Code of Practice. If you have a complaint about the editorial content which relates to inaccuracy or intrusion, then please contact the editor here . If you are dissatisfied with the response provided you can contact IPSO here