Mar
APR
May
2
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
2 Apr 16 - 2 Apr 16
Close Help
Search
Login
Register
Buildings
Browse
Featured
Nearby
Most Popular
Professionals
Collections
Apps
Upload a Building
Report
Tweet
Bramshill House
Basic
Data
Media
Publications
Files
Edit profile
Add to
Favourites
New guide...
Add
Location
Mansion Dr, Bramshill, Hampshire RG27 0, UK
Incorrect location?
Construction status
Built in  January2006
32% profile completeness
Improve this profile?
Add description
Add files
Add publications
Add media
Our community will try and seduce you.
Ontotext edited this building last
References
Freebase , licensed under CC-BY
Wikipedia , licensed under the GFDL
Suggestions
Built / France, Metz Centre Pompidou-Metz
by Shigeru Ban and Jean de Gastines
Built / Tanzania, Palo Alto Tanzanian Hotel
by WOW Architects Pte Ltd
Built / Italy, Rome Jubilee Church
China, Beijing The National Grand Theatre of China!
Estimated completion / United Arab Emirates, Abu Dhabi Louvre Abu Dhabi
by Jean Nouvel
Built / Switzerland, Renens Rolex Learning Centre
by SANAA (Sejima and Nishizawa and Associates) , Kazuyo Sejima & Associates , Yumiko Yamada , Rikiya Yamamoto , Osamu Kato , Naoto Noguchi , Mizuko Kaji , Takayuki Hasegawa and Louis-Antoine Grego
Built / Switzerland, Ramosch Haus Presenhuber
by Andreas Fuhrimann Gabrielle Hächler Architekten and Andreas Fuhrimann + Gabrielle Hachler
China, Shanghai UAE Pavillion Shanghai Expo 2010
Estimated completion / Ras Al-Khaimah Emirates Complex
by Snøhetta
Built / Brazil, Brasilia Osler house
by Renata Tilli , StudioMK27 – Marcio Kogan , Oswaldo Pessano , Renata Fulanetto , Lair Reis , Samanta Cafardo , Carolina Castroviejo , Eduardo Glycerio , Maria Cristina Motta , Mariana Simas and Gabriel Kogan
03spx9y
Source en.wikipedia.org
Copyright: Andrew Smith
View original size Report
Bramshill House is a  Jacobean  mansion standing on 269 acres (109 ha) of land in the  civil parish of  Bramshill in northeast  Hampshire in  England.
It has been the location of the  Police Staff College since 1955.
History
Reference to Bramshill (or  Bromeselle) can be traced back to  Saxon times.
In the 14th century it was the home of Thomas Foxley, who rebuilt  Windsor Castle for the Crown.
He appears to have used masons from Windsor in erecting a small  castle or fortified  manor house at Bramshill in 1327.
Their work can still be seen in the cellars of the present house.
In 1605  Edward Zouche, 11th Baron Zouche of Harringworth, bought the property from Sir  Stephen Thornhurst of  Agnes Court,  Kent.
He demolished a large part of the building and began to build the Bramshill house of today.
This was completed in 1612.
The building included both a chapel and priest’s hole.
In 1622, while hunting in the park,  George Abbot,  Archbishop of Canterbury accidentally shot and killed one of the keepers with his cross-bow.
It almost caused his downfall.
In 1699 the property was purchased by Sir John Cope, whose descendants occupied the premises until 1935.
The Cope family demolished the chapel during the 18th century.
Later, the house was the residence of  Lord Brocket.
After  World War II, the exiled  King Michael and Queen Ana of  Romania lived at Bramshill.
First-class cricket
The  cricket ground at the house was a venue for  pre-county club Hampshire.
The ground hosted 4 first-class matches, the first of which was in 1823 when pre-county club Hampshire played  England.
The ground played host to 2 further first-class matches for pre-county club Hampshire in 1825.
The following year it hosted its final first-class when a combined Hampshire and Surrey team played  pre-county club Sussex.
A cricket ground still exists on the site of the house today.
Read more »
Building Activity
Debate
Edit Description
Edit Data
Add media
Add Publications
Add Files
Post Comment
Produced by Despark
Search Buildings
Browse Professionals
Upload a Building
Add a professional
Privacy Policy
Terms Of Use
Contact
About
Blog