DEC
APR
AUG
2
2014
2016
2017
17 captures
25 Sep 09 - 24 Oct 16
Close Help
Research categories
RESEARCH CATEGORIES
Earth and the Environment
History
Literature and the Arts
Medicine
People
Philosophy and Religion
Places
Plants and Animals
Science and Technology
Social Sciences and the Law
Sports and Everyday Life
View all reference sources
FREE REFERENCE ENTRIES
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z
#
Home Dictionaries, Thesauruses, Pictures, and Press Releases A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture January 2000
Jacobean architecture
Print this article
Cite this article
Tools
A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture |                     2000
|                 700+                 words
© A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture 2000, originally published by Oxford University Press 2000.
Jacobean architecture. Style of English architecture of the reign of  King  James  I and  VI (1603–25), not greatly differing from Elizabethan architecture , and largely continuing into the reign of  Charles  I (1625–49). It was essentially a mélange of Flemish, French, and Italian Renaissance influences, with pronounced emphases on themes drawn from Flemish Mannerism , including jewelled strapwork and grotesque ornament. Assemblages of Orders , emblems, heraldic devices, herms , and obelisks abounded, while curved and Dutch gables were also favoured. Traces of Gothic , especially Perpendicular , architecture remained, notably the continuing use of mullioned and transomed windows, and the late-medieval E- and H-plans were also used. Good examples of Jacobean architecture are Hatfield House, Herts. (1607–12), Bramshill, Surrey (1605–12), and  Audley  End,  Essex (1603–16). However,  Inigo Jones 's contributions also took place in the reigns of  James  I and  VI and  Charles  I, but his sophisticated Italian style is not described as ‘Jacobean’. There was a Jacobean Revival in C19, notably in country-houses, and it was also mixed with the Queen Anne style to produce a singularly curious hybrid (e.g.  R.  N. Shaw 's New Zealand Chambers, London (1872–3—demolished)).
Bibliography
Airs  (1995);
Cruickshank (ed.) (1996);
Lampugnani (ed.) & Dinsmoor  (1986);
Mowl ,(1993);
Pe: BoE (1951– );
Sturgis et al.  (1901–2)
Summerson (ed.)(1993)
Cite this article
Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
MLA
Chicago
APA
JAMES STEVENS CURL. " Jacobean architecture. " A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture.                         2000. Encyclopedia.com. 2 Apr. 2016 < http://www.encyclopedia.com >.
JAMES STEVENS CURL. "Jacobean architecture." A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture.                                                  2000. Encyclopedia.com. (April 2, 2016). http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1O1-Jacobeanarchitecture.html
JAMES STEVENS CURL. "Jacobean architecture." A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture.                                                  2000. Retrieved                         April 02, 2016                         from Encyclopedia.com: http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1O1-Jacobeanarchitecture.html
Learn more about citation styles
Citation styles
Encyclopedia.com gives you the ability to cite reference entries and articles according to common styles from the Modern Language Association (MLA), The Chicago Manual of Style, and the American Psychological Association (APA).
Within the “Cite this article” tool, pick a style to see how all available information looks when formatted according to that style.  Then, copy and paste the text into your bibliography or works cited list.
Because each style has its own formatting nuances that evolve over time and not all information is available for every reference entry or article, Encyclopedia.com cannot guarantee each citation it generates.  Therefore, it’s best to use Encyclopedia.com citations as a starting point before checking the style against your school or publication’s requirements and the most-recent information available at these sites:
Modern Language Association
http://www.mla.org/style
The Chicago Manual of Style
http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide.html
American Psychological Association
http://apastyle.apa.org/
Notes:
Most online reference entries and articles do not have page numbers.  Therefore, that information is unavailable for most Encyclopedia.com content.  However, the date of retrieval is often important.  Refer to each style’s convention regarding the best way to format page numbers and retrieval dates.
In addition to the MLA, Chicago, and APA styles, your school, university, publication, or institution may have its own requirements for citations.  Therefore, be sure to refer to those guidelines when editing your bibliography or works cited list.
Related newspaper, magazine, and trade journal articles from Questia
Including press releases, facts, information, and biographies
For more facts and information, see all results
Trending topics
Education
Careers
For students and teachers
Encyclopedia.com provides students and teachers facts, information, and biographies from verified, citable sources, including:
Home
About us
Help
Site feedback
Privacy policy
Terms and conditions
Encyclopedia.com is operated by Cengage Learning © Copyright 2016. All rights reserved.