FEB
APR
May
2
2015
2016
2017
6 captures
2 Feb 15 - 2 Apr 16
Close Help
Download
our corporate brochure
Corporate Brochure
City & Country is a family~owned business which was originally founded in 1962. The Group has always been construction focused, although over the last 50 years we have been successfully evolving and embracing change to become a market leading niche developer; specialising in working with the very best of Britain’s architectural heritage and sensitive landscapes.
READ MORE
Find A Home
Buy
Rent
Current Developments
Current Developments
Angel's Courtyard, Colchester, Essex
Bentley Priory, Stanmore, Middlesex
King Edward VII Estate, Midhurst, Sussex
The General, Bristol
The Garden Quarter, Caversfield, Oxfordshire
Old Saint Michaels, Braintree, Essex
The Manor, Herringswell, Suffolk
Developments Coming Soon
bramshill house
Donaldson's, Edinburgh
Factory No.1, Bristol
Sundridge Park Mansion, Bromley
St Osyth Priory, Essex
Past Developments
Restoration Developments
New Build Developments
Commercial Properties
Commercial Properties
Factory No.1, Bristol
Angel's Courtyard, Colchester
Rivermead Industrial Estate, Chelmsford
The Chapel, King Edward VII Estate
The General, Bristol
Other Rental Opportunities
Purchaser Assistance
Help To Buy Scheme
Assisted Move Scheme
Financial Advice
Customer Care
Step By Step Guide
Customer Care Charter
In The Media
What the Papers Say
City & Country News
Films
Unique Filming Locations
George Clarke Restoration Man
Q and A
About Us
About Us
Meet The Team
Contact Us
Awards
Corporate Film
Partnering
Case Studies
Testimonials
Register Your Interest
Public Consultation
1610 The Old Shepton Mallet Gaol
1792 The Old Gloucester Gaol
1877 The Old Portsmouth Gaol
1885 The Old Dorchester Gaol
Bramshill House, Hampshire
Burderop Park, Swindon
Donaldson's
Factory No.1, Bedminster
King Edward Vii, Midhurst
St Osyth Priory, Essex
Sundridge Park Mansion, Bromley
Corporate
Join Our Team
Current Vacancies
Graduate Trainee Programme
Personal Safety For Visitors
Policies & Business Terms
Land Requirements
CONTACT
Leave this field blank.
T: 01279 817882
F: 01279 817883
E: info@cityandcountry.co.uk
Bentfield Place, Bentfield Road, Stansted, Essex, CM24 8HL
Home
Public Consultation
Bramshill House, Hampshire
Heritage
City and Country
Welcome Public Consultation Heritage The Team
Heritage
The present form of Bramshill House and Gardens dates from the early 17th Century and although it incorporates much of a 14th Century house, most of what we see today was built between 1605 and 1625 by Edward, 11th Baron Zouche of Harringworth. Perched on top of a South West facing escarpment, it overlooks the heathland of the valley of the River Hart.
It is one of the largest Jacobean‘Prodigy’ houses and an exceptional collection of eccentricities, in that it is a re-design and re-organisation of a previous, substantial building.The internal arrangement seems largely determined by the previously existing building. In common with a number of other great houses of the period the general appearance is restrained with only one spectacular display of decoration on the South West elevation. 
Zouche located the house at the crossing of two great avenues and surrounded it by walled gardens; two projecting wings which formed a separate entrance courtyard were demolished by Sir John Cope who purchased the building in 1699 from the Henley’s who had lived there since 1640. 
The Cope family occupied Bramshill House and Gardens from 1703 until 1935. The house was re-fronted in 1703; the mezzanine and Queen Anne stairs inserted early in the C18; and the main stairs replaced twice – in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. 
In the early C19, the West pavilion was partly rebuilt and the courtyard corridor added. The original chapel in the middle of the house was also converted at this time and a new one created on the first floor. Further internal alterations occurred during the Brocket occupation of 1935 – 1953 until it was purchased by the Home Office. 
Now listed Grade I, Bramshill House and Gardens stands in 106ha of grounds which are located in the centre of a Grade II* listed park which extends to 240ha over several ownerships. The park retains many historic landscape features dating back to medieval times. Lord Zouche’s 17th Century park is still evident throughout the park, with notable elements including the gardens around the mansion and the main lake to the North East. Several additions have been made throughout the last four hundred years. It is still possible to read many of the historic tree avenues and axial rides laid across the estate, with some containing veteran trees thought to date back to before 1700. 
The house is magnificently sited on a level plateau, dominating a South-West facing wooded escarpment overlooking the River Hart valley. To the North West there is a large man-made lake contained by embankments on two sides, and lawns with an abundance of splendid mature trees, surrounded by a belt of mixed woodland. The grounds immediately adjacent to the Mansion are partly enclosed to form walled gardens. To the South East and South are terraced areas run to parkland. These were previously formal gardens and referred to as Italian Gardens in 19th century documents.
During the Second World War the house was used by the Red Cross as a maternity home for evacuee mothers from Portsmouth, and afterwards as a home for the exiled King of Romania and his family. 
More recently, the building and estate was acquired by the Home Office for a National Police Training College in 1953.. A campus of new buildings has developed to the North West of the mansion over the area formerly occupied by the farmyard and estate buildings.
Our Developments
Bentley Priory, Stanmore, Middlesex
Winner of the 2014 What House? Award for Best Renovation and Best Partnership Scheme.  City & Country has created an exclusive selection of 1, 2 and 3...
VIEW DEVELOPMENT
Latest News
City & Country was delighted to be able to sponsor The Royal Association for Deaf People’s (RAD) packed out gala award ceremony in London
READ MORE
Video
Angel's Courtyard | A tranquil oasis on the High Street in Colchester
SEE MORE
Sitemap
Privacy policy
Cookies policy
Terms of use
Policies & Business Terms
© Copyright City & Country 2016. All rights reserved.