Royal Interiors, Part II
Quote from: CHRISinUSA on January 26, 2011, 10:50:22 AM
Quote from: Lindelle on January 24, 2011, 10:51:37 PM
They say that St James Palace is a maze of corridors and quite clumsy.
Does anyone know of the corridor that is supoosed to connect St James and Clarence House?
After the death of George IV in 1830, the Duke of Clarence acceded to the Throne as William IV.
In start contrast to his late brother, William IV was quite informal and not at all extravagent, and preferred to remain living at Clarence House as King.
When the Houses of Parliament were destroyed by fire in 1834, William IV actually offered the new Buckingham Palace as a ready-made replacement (Parliament declined).
William IV's main concession to his new role as Sovereign was the addition of a corridor at first-floor level in Clarence House to connect with the State Apartments of St. James's Palace.
I'm not sure exactly where it is located - but old floor plans I have seen show a couple of small closets or anterooms at the western end of the first floor State Apartments at St. James' Palace (along with a back staircase), right where the two building meet.
I'd imagine that's where the corridor was added - which would also be right behind (north) of the Prince of Wales' bedroom suite which faces south over the palace gardens and the Mall.
Thanks Chris.
Do you happen to know where I could see those pics?
Ridgeway:
A photograph of the Dinning Room at Clarence House.
(Set out for a lunch engagement)
CHRISinUSA:
Quote from: Lindelle on January 27, 2011, 03:26:58 AM
Thanks Chris.Do you happen to know where I could see those pics?
They used to be somewhere on the forum, probably even earlier this thread  - I imagine they are still there (try using the search option at the top of your screen and search for floor plans in the Windsor threads), or just click backward on the threads to view earlier pages.
On the other subject - the private rooms at BP and Windsor - I concur with  Traditionalist..... although at BP I believe there are a few additional rooms in the north wing considered part of the private apartments  In addition to the Queen's Dining Room, Sitting Room, Bedroom and Dressing Room.
There are a few (3-4) smaller rooms at the very northwest corner of the palace (I believe the Sheraton Room is the name of one of them) that we rarely ever hear or see pictures about.
Not sure what those rooms are used for on a daily basis.
Windsor seems to give the royal couple much more privacy - which is probably one reason they prefer it so much.
I've always thought the private areas of BP were inadequate because of the "Private" corridors that run along them.
They seem far from private.
For some odd reason the Prime Minister's weekly route to the Queen's Audience Chamber is up the King's Staircase and down that private corridor past the doors to the Queen's bedroom, sitting room, dining room, etc.
Why he doesn't instead enter via the Grand Entrance and go up the Minister's Staircase to reach the audience room is beyond me.
Perhaps it's one of those archaic "special rights" afforded to the prime minister long ago that the court doesn't wish to dispense with?
If I were King and had to live at BP, I'd have blocked off both ends of that corridor long ago and granted access only to family and personal staff.
Everyone else could jolly well go around the south (household) corridor, or travel from east to west on a lower floor.
Learning:
Quote from: CHRISinUSA on January 27, 2011, 07:26:14 AM
If I were King and had to live at BP, I'd have blocked off both ends of that corridor long ago and granted access only to family and personal staff.
Everyone else could jolly well go around the south (household) corridor, or travel from east to west on a lower floor.
Me, too.
But that raises a question: how much authority do the Royals have to alter or renovate the official residences?
Can the Queen rearrange the furniture in her sitting room on her own initiative?
What about the furniture in a state room?
Could they close a corridor as you suggest or do they have to apply to the Royal Household Property Agency?
I suppose financing the changes would be an issue.
Naslednik Norvezhskiy:
Quote from: Learning on January 27, 2011, 08:31:21 AM
Can the Queen rearrange the furniture in her sitting room on her own initiative?
Lol, is your question serious?
I think even the last Merovingians wielded that much power, even with the real bosses, the Carolingians, being majordomos!
Haha, that's probably how Late Merovingians France was like: The butler ruled the kingdom while the king rearranged his furniture.
Quote
What about the furniture in a state room?
Could they close a corridor as you suggest or do they have to apply to the Royal Household Property Agency?
I suppose financing the changes would be an issue.
I would guess that the important power that be to be consulted or at least notified is the one responsible for the cataloguing and conservation of the historical furniture.
They need to keep track of what is where and make sure nothing disappears, since the palace in addition to being a home and a workplace essentially is a museum.
Navigation