Hurrah!
Parliament's burning down: THE DAY PARLIAMENT BURNED DOWN BY CAROLINE SHENTON
Enlarge
Fire at the Palace of Westminster 1834
We remember 1666.
We remember 1940.
But who remembers October 16, 1834 - the date of London’s most spectacular fire between The Great Fire and the Blitz, when Parliament burned down, Lords, Commons and all?
For the thousands who watched it, it was the most dramatic experience of their lives, a spectacle of awe, horror and curious beauty.
But is it worth a whole book?
Yes, indeed - Caroline Shenton proves so.
1,100
The number of rooms in the rebuilt Palace of Westminster
She is its ideal chronicler because she is Clerk of the Records at the Parliamentary Archives, an expert on the Old Palace of Westminster which was replaced by the iconic building we now know.
She knows every nook and cranny of the lost palace - and it was all nooks and crannies.
She knows who lived and worked there and what they all did on the night.
Hour by hour she takes us through the fantastic build-up of the fire.
You could have been there.
At its height, the blazing red glow could be seen by the King and Queen at Windsor and by the architect Charles Barry in a stagecoach on the South Downs, returning from Brighton.
He hurried to the scene and exclaimed: ‘What a chance for an architect!’
He was going to be that architect.
His collaborator, Augustus Pugin, rejoiced to see the recently added facades of the old buildings go up.
‘Oh, it was a glorious sight to see the mullions and cement pinnacles and battlements flying while the turrets smoked like so many factory chimneys.’
There was very little regret for the Old Palace.
It was a ramshackle, higgledy-piggledy collection of buildings added over the centuries to a palace of Henry VIII, a rabbit warren of staircases and corridors ideal for spreading fire.
MPs had been complaining for years about their chamber, a dark, airless box which could seat only half of them in cramped discomfort.
William Cobbett, the radical journalist, demanded: ‘Why do we live in this hubbub?
Why are 648 of us crammed into a space allowing each no more than a foot and a half square?’
Although packed in ‘like herrings in a barrel’, when it came to it MPs defeated the plans to improve things out of conservatism.
The fire took the decision for them.
Architect: Charles Barry who designed the rebuilding of the Houses of Parliament
Why did it start?
Because someone had the bright idea of using the heating furnaces, whose flues ran under the House of Lords, to burn the wood tallies, the primitive accounting system of the Exchequer.
A tally was a short stick in which notches of various sizes were carved to record sums owing to the Treasury.
The collectors of taxes were given half of a split stick and when bringing in the money, it had to ‘tally’ with the other half.
Thousands of these bits of wood had stacked up and needed clearing away.
Two Irish labourers were given the job of carting and burning them in the furnaces starting from dawn that day.
They piled the lot in.
That afternoon, the housekeeper, a Mrs Wright, was showing two visitors over the House of Lords - one of the perks of her job.
Both men remarked how smoky it was, so smoky that they could not see the famous Armada tapestries that hung high on the walls.
And the floor at Black Rod’s box directly over the furnaces was so hot they could feel it through their boots.
‘What suffocating heat!’
they remarked.
It was then five o’clock.
Mrs Wright, undisturbed by all this, locked up and went to her apartments.
It wasn’t until seven when flames were flickering under the chamber door and from the roof that the alarm was raised.
Fire engines galloped to the spot - all of them pumped manually.
Rods projected from either side and had to be thrust up and down to fill the engine from the street hydrants and then empty the water through the hoses.
Such hard work took teams of men who had to be changed every five minutes.
They were too few and too late to beat the fire which, having consumed the Lords, proceeded to the Commons and the Speaker’s House and came very close to burning Westminster Hall.
This venerable spot was saved by a change in the wind and a firebreak made by the army - the Guards had been called in.
Meanwhile the crowds of onlookers multiplied in every street, on Westminster Bridge, on the opposite shore of the river, and in the river itself.
At low tide it was crammed with boats.
■ After the fire, Parliament launched a  competition to design a new palace.
Out of 97 entries no. 64 was  chosen, designed by Charles Barry with Gothic Revival detail by Augustus  Pugin.
■ The building estimate was £724,986 over six years.
It took thirty years and cost over £2 million.
■ Charles Dickens wrote about the rebuilding, criticising the cost.
■  The Commons Chamber was destroyed during the Blitz  and small pieces of  the original wood recovered were used to make the Commons’ snuff box.
In an era used only to oil lamps, here was a marvellous spectacle.
You could read a newspaper 500 yards away.
Turner was filling sketchbooks from a boat.
Constable was sketching in a Hackney carriage on the bridge.
‘All London went to see the fire and a very beautiful fire it was,’ wrote Letitia Landon, a poet, to her friend Christina Rossetti.
The sky, loaded with crimson smoke, turned the moon red.
Sparks as big as snowflakes fell on the opposite bank.
Witnesses wrote to friends: ‘Never was a spectacle so much enjoyed’ …‘From the bridge, it looked sublime’.
‘A spectacle of terrible beauty’, said the Times.
The intricate tracery of Westminster Abbey had never looked so fine as when lit by the fire.
There were rounds of applause and huzzahs when columns of flame exploded and roofs fell in.
People said: ‘Tis a pity the Bishops weren’t in it’ and all rejoiced that the new abominable ‘Poor Law’ (which set up the workhouse) was burnt.
‘A man sorry I did not anywhere see’, wrote Thomas Carlyle.
The Prime Minister, Lord Melbourne and his Cabinet, stood watching.
The Attorney General, Lord Campbell, helped to pump a fire engine and was rewarded by having his pocket picked of ‘a purse of four pounds or five pounds and a pocket handkerchief’.
The consumption of beer was terrific.
The local Star & Garter pub was compensated £11.10s.2d for serving 5,000 pints to the firefighters.
Another 9,000 pints were provided by order of the Speaker.
Thirsty work, fire fighting.
Caroline Shenton laments the fire as ‘one of the greatest archival disasters’.
Nearly all the records of the Commons proceedings from 1495 onwards turned to ashes.
But were the Acts of Parliament, including the Great Reform Bill of two years before, still valid?
Rebuilt: The Houses of Parliament today
Yes, they were stored in the Jewel Tower across the road.
Bundles of State papers were hurled from the windows of the burning buildings, not necessarily aiding their preservation.
And the brass standard weights and measures - the standard yard and pound weights - were found molten and distorted in the embers.
For a while no one could check a weight or a length.
But not one person was killed.
Some fire fighting injuries were compensated, as were the clerks and Lord Chancellor for the loss of their wigs.
The inquiry found no mystery, no arson, no plot - just plain old human error.
It has been forgotten but as fires go it was a humdinger.
It achieved what Guy Fawkes failed to - and as it turned out, nobody much minded.
We got Big Ben instead.