SEP
APR
May
14
2012
2016
2017
28 captures
25 Aug 12 - 14 Apr 16
Close Help
Hurrah! Parliament's burning down: THE DAY PARLIAMENT BURNED DOWN BY CAROLINE SHENTON
 
Home
    U.K.
News
Sports
U.S. Showbiz
Australia
Femail
Health
Science
Money
Video
Travel
Columnists
Latest headlines
World News
You mag
Event
Books
Mail Shop
Bingo
Property
Horoscopes
Blogs
Motoring
Stats
My Profile
Logout
Login
Feedback
DailyMail
Home Top
show ad
Hurrah! Parliament's burning down
THE DAY PARLIAMENT BURNED DOWN BY CAROLINE SHENTON (Oxford University Press £18.99)
By Peter Lewis for MailOnline
Published: 12:14 EST, 23 August 2012 | Updated: 11:03 EST, 24 August 2012
Enlarge  
Fire at the Palace of Westminster 1834
We remember 1666. We remember 1940. But who remembers October 16, 1834 - the date of London’s most spectacular fire between The Great Fire and the Blitz, when Parliament burned down, Lords, Commons and all? 
For the thousands who watched it, it was the most dramatic experience of their lives, a spectacle of awe, horror and curious beauty. But is it worth a whole book? Yes, indeed - Caroline Shenton proves so.
1,100
The number of rooms in the rebuilt Palace of Westminster
She is its ideal chronicler because she is Clerk of the Records at the Parliamentary Archives, an expert on the Old Palace of Westminster which was replaced by the iconic building we now know.
She knows every nook and cranny of the lost palace - and it was all nooks and crannies. She knows who lived and worked there and what they all did on the night. Hour by hour she takes us through the fantastic build-up of the fire. You could have been there.
At its height, the blazing red glow could be seen by the King and Queen at Windsor and by the architect Charles Barry in a stagecoach on the South Downs, returning from Brighton.
He hurried to the scene and exclaimed: ‘What a chance for an architect!’ He was going to be that architect. His collaborator, Augustus Pugin, rejoiced to see the recently added facades of the old buildings go up. ‘Oh, it was a glorious sight to see the mullions and cement pinnacles and battlements flying while the turrets smoked like so many factory chimneys.’
There was very little regret for the Old Palace. It was a ramshackle, higgledy-piggledy collection of buildings added over the centuries to a palace of Henry VIII, a rabbit warren of staircases and corridors ideal for spreading fire.
MPs had been complaining for years about their chamber, a dark, airless box which could seat only half of them in cramped discomfort.
William Cobbett, the radical journalist, demanded: ‘Why do we live in this hubbub? Why are 648 of us crammed into a space allowing each no more than a foot and a half square?’
Although packed in ‘like herrings in a barrel’, when it came to it MPs defeated the plans to improve things out of conservatism. The fire took the decision for them. 
Architect: Charles Barry who designed the rebuilding of the Houses of Parliament
Why did it start? Because someone had the bright idea of using the heating furnaces, whose flues ran under the House of Lords, to burn the wood tallies, the primitive accounting system of the Exchequer.
A tally was a short stick in which notches of various sizes were carved to record sums owing to the Treasury. The collectors of taxes were given half of a split stick and when bringing in the money, it had to ‘tally’ with the other half.
Thousands of these bits of wood had stacked up and needed clearing away. Two Irish labourers were given the job of carting and burning them in the furnaces starting from dawn that day. They piled the lot in. 
That afternoon, the housekeeper, a Mrs Wright, was showing two visitors over the House of Lords - one of the perks of her job. Both men remarked how smoky it was, so smoky that they could not see the famous Armada tapestries that hung high on the walls.
And the floor at Black Rod’s box directly over the furnaces was so hot they could feel it through their boots. ‘What suffocating heat!’ they remarked.
It was then five o’clock. Mrs Wright, undisturbed by all this, locked up and went to her apartments. It wasn’t until seven when flames were flickering under the chamber door and from the roof that the alarm was raised.
Fire engines galloped to the spot - all of them pumped manually. Rods projected from either side and had to be thrust up and down to fill the engine from the street hydrants and then empty the water through the hoses. Such hard work took teams of men who had to be changed every five minutes.
They were too few and too late to beat the fire which, having consumed the Lords, proceeded to the Commons and the Speaker’s House and came very close to burning Westminster Hall. This venerable spot was saved by a change in the wind and a firebreak made by the army - the Guards had been called in.
Meanwhile the crowds of onlookers multiplied in every street, on Westminster Bridge, on the opposite shore of the river, and in the river itself. At low tide it was crammed with boats.
■ After the fire, Parliament launched a  competition to design a new palace. Out of 97 entries no. 64 was  chosen, designed by Charles Barry with Gothic Revival detail by Augustus  Pugin.
■ The building estimate was £724,986 over six years. It took thirty years and cost over £2 million.
■ Charles Dickens wrote about the rebuilding, criticising the cost.
■  The Commons Chamber was destroyed during the Blitz  and small pieces of  the original wood recovered were used to make the Commons’ snuff box.
 
In an era used only to oil lamps, here was a marvellous spectacle. You could read a newspaper 500 yards away. Turner was filling sketchbooks from a boat. Constable was sketching in a Hackney carriage on the bridge.  ‘All London went to see the fire and a very beautiful fire it was,’ wrote Letitia Landon, a poet, to her friend Christina Rossetti. The sky, loaded with crimson smoke, turned the moon red. Sparks as big as snowflakes fell on the opposite bank.
Witnesses wrote to friends: ‘Never was a spectacle so much enjoyed’ …‘From the bridge, it looked sublime’. ‘A spectacle of terrible beauty’, said the Times. The intricate tracery of Westminster Abbey had never looked so fine as when lit by the fire.
There were rounds of applause and huzzahs when columns of flame exploded and roofs fell in. People said: ‘Tis a pity the Bishops weren’t in it’ and all rejoiced that the new abominable ‘Poor Law’ (which set up the workhouse) was burnt. ‘A man sorry I did not anywhere see’, wrote Thomas Carlyle.
The Prime Minister, Lord Melbourne and his Cabinet, stood watching. The Attorney General, Lord Campbell, helped to pump a fire engine and was rewarded by having his pocket picked of ‘a purse of four pounds or five pounds and a pocket handkerchief’.
The consumption of beer was terrific. The local Star & Garter pub was compensated £11.10s.2d for serving 5,000 pints to the firefighters. Another 9,000 pints were provided by order of the Speaker. Thirsty work, fire fighting.
Caroline Shenton laments the fire as ‘one of the greatest archival disasters’. Nearly all the records of the Commons proceedings from 1495 onwards turned to ashes.
But were the Acts of Parliament, including the Great Reform Bill of two years before, still valid?
Rebuilt: The Houses of Parliament today
Yes, they were stored in the Jewel Tower across the road. Bundles of State papers were hurled from the windows of the burning buildings, not necessarily aiding their preservation.
And the brass standard weights and measures - the standard yard and pound weights - were found molten and distorted in the embers. For a while no one could check a weight or a length.
But not one person was killed. Some fire fighting injuries were compensated, as were the clerks and Lord Chancellor for the loss of their wigs.
The inquiry found no mystery, no arson, no plot - just plain old human error.
It has been forgotten but as fires go it was a humdinger. It achieved what Guy Fawkes failed to - and as it turned out, nobody much minded. We got Big Ben instead.
Share or comment on this article
Comments (2)
Share what you think
Newest
Oldest
Best rated
Worst rated
 View all
The comments below have not been moderated.
 View all
The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline.
We are no longer accepting comments on this article.
Who is this week's top commenter? Find out now
Bing
Site
Web
Enter search term:
Search
Like DailyMail
Follow MailOnline
Follow DailyMail
+1 DailyMail
   
DON'T MISS
Kate's no Katniss! Duchess of Cambridge tries her hand at archery on royal visit to Bhutan - but soon succumbs to a fit of the giggles 
'I'm embarrassed and mortified, I went too far': Kerry Katona discusses THAT drunken airport incident as her children support her on This Morning 
'No bouncy boobs!' Davina McCall, 48, shows off her toned figure in a mesh crop top and leggings for sporty selfie Our fitspiration!
Scott Disick tries to make a low key exit from Hollywood nightspot as he parties with leggy blonde Moving on after Kourtney split?
Georgia May Foote shows off sparkling ring in romantic snap with boyfriend of four months Giovanni Pernice... but confirms it's NOT an engagement ring
Can you eat pizza and burgers and STILL lose weight? New M&S range promises to get you into shape for summer WITHOUT giving up your favourite foods!  SPONSORED
PICTURE EXCLUSIVE: Guy Ritchie joins son Rocco, 15, at Madonna's house as they make amends after High Court judge warned they could 'ruin' teen's childhood
Frankie Bridge looks effortlessly cool in a loose denim shirt as she films new TV show after praising husband Wayne for being a hands-on father
Megan McKenna means business in chic tuxedo jacket as she joins Courtney Green and Chloe Meadows for night out following explosive TOWIE finale 
Date night delight! Sam Faiers shows off her impressive cleavage and svelte post-baby body in a sexy LBD as she snaps selfie in Dubai
Grieving Debbie McGee is a picture of elegance as she puts on a brave face in first red carpet appearance since husband Paul Daniels' tragic death
Busty Blac Chyna shows off voluptuous curves during date night with fiance Rob Kardashian... amid claims the duo are set to marry this summer  
Girls' night out! Stylish pals Taylor Swift and Lily Aldridge wear matching monochrome as they head to Alessandra Ambrosio's birthday bash 
'People think we're together in real-life!' Holly Willoughby reveals she and Phillip Schofield are often mistaken for a couple on holiday  That's awkward...
Move aside, Bieber! Victoria Beckham posts incredibly cute video of her son Cruz, 11, singing... and fans are left stunned at his pitch-perfect performance
VIDEO: Listen as Cruz Beckham follows in mum's footsteps with adorable a cappella Do you think the 11-year-old sounds better than his Spice Girl mother?
Alessandra Ambrosio shows off her ample assets and long legs in very sexy sequin mini dress as she celebrates her 35th birthday with fiancé Jamie Mazur
Susan Sarandon styles out her foot brace in a chic white ensemble as she joins BFF Geena Davis at The Meddler premiere Reunited co-stars
Killer heels, matching skirts and embroidered capes: Kate and the Queen of Bhutan are style sisters at their first meeting - but who won the fashion showdown?
'Wonderful, genuine young love': Body language expert says Kate and Wills' displays of affection are a world away from Charles and Di's disastrous India trip
Newly-single Millie Mackintosh shows off her flat stomach and lithe physique after gym session in LA... as she enjoys her SEVENTH holiday of 2016
Parker Posey provokes angry response after 'Insta-TransGender' Twitter post in which she claimed she was 'driving around all day as a man'
Beach beauty! Home and Away star Pia Miller flaunts flawless bikini body in VERY skimpy brightly coloured two-piece while filming long-running soap
Bearded Charlie Hunnam cuts a rugged figure in casual togs as he attempts to blend in while on shopping trip Certainly caught the eye out in Los Angeles
No bloomers here! Katy Perry ditches underwear in sheer leather gown at cancer event with boyfriend Orlando Bloom Just back from Aspen
Kourtney Kardashian shows off her gym-honed figure in a brown suede fitted dress as she checks out the Alice + Olivia show Looking sleek
Mamma mia! Futuristic Kim Kardashian shows off her derriere and post-baby body in skintight outfit as she films KUWTK with Kylie Jenner
Smitten Jude Law, 43, can't take his eyes off leggy girlfriend Phillipa Coan, 30, as the couple enjoy a day out in Los Angeles She keeps him young
Bella Hadid flaunts her taut tum in white crop top and high-waisted trousers as she sports striking updo for latest photo shoot Posed against a fence
Smart and sexy! Jennifer Aniston bares her perfectly toned legs in a black blazer dress at the premiere of Mother's Day  Known for her fab legs
Now you can contour your BUM: Make-up artists reveal how to improve your rear end using the Kardashians' favourite technique Has been a hit online
Kesha looks relaxed in a sheer shirt and leggings as she enjoys a low-key day in Los Angeles a week after latest legal blow Difficult time for singer
Relationship goals: Pregnant Behati Prinsloo and Adam Levine enjoy a pre-baby date night as they cosy up courtside at Kobe Bryant's final game
Ashley James shows off her sensational curves in smouldering selfie as she slips into a leotard from Beyonce's Ivy Park line She's a fan
Daddy's Doubles: Celebrity sons who are the spitting image of their fathers when they were young  From Brooklyn Beckham to Scott Eastwood
David Gest 'spent up to £10,000 a day on 50p-a-time casino slot machines in the months leading up to his death'  Reports claim he struggled with debts
Made In Chelsea's Tiffany Watson shows off superslim figure in see-through lace top for a night on the town with friends Reality star's evening out
PICTURE EXCLUSIVE: Miley Cyrus holds on tight to Liam Hemsworth in LA as the two show affection for first time since rekindling romance
'You've ruined my life': Chloe Lewis proves her strength as she finally ends things with 'cheating' boyfriend Jake Hall during heated TOWIE finale
Witnessing history! David Beckham takes son Brooklyn to see Kobe Bryant's final game for the LA Lakers at Staples Center  Big basketball game
... as super-fan Brooklyn gets a HUGE grin out of Kanye West as he bags a selfie with rapper at Kobe Bryant's NBA swansong He loves the game
Father of BGT's Beau Dermott, 12, dismisses 'cheating' furore over her 'vocal training'... and claims she entered local competitions to 'build up confidence'
Vanessa White is super chic in wide-legged trousers and heels as she hits the star-studded opening of the V&A Museum's underwear exhibition 
Mischa Barton flaunts her perfect pins in a thigh-grazing mini before wowing in clingy jumpsuit for party-hopping night out Stars in her eyes
Charlize Theron flashes leg in chic black frock as she introduces prestigious honour in Las Vegas The 40-year-old looked incredible
Coco Austin covers up her very ample assets in figure-hugging ensemble... after twerking in thong lingerie while posing next to baby daughter
Kanye West giggles like a child as he fan-boys over Kobe Bryant following his triumphant final Lakers game The rapper is clearly a huge fan
Still a Pretty Woman! Julia Roberts is flawless in white shorts as she shows off her long legs at Mother's Day premiere Amazing at 48
Putting on quite a show! Victoria's Secret model Shanina Shaik shows off trim figure and pert posterior in skintight nude jumpsuit as she leaves LA hotel
Emily Ratajkowski shows off her lithe frame in white form-fitting cold shoulder dress as she heats up the FROW at Alice + Olivia runway show
Bella Hadid shows off her long legs in mini dress as she cosies up to boyfriend The Weeknd for sporty date night at Kobe Bryant's final Lakers game
Anna Wintour reveals she got lost in a basement at Kanye West's 'migrant chic' Yeezy show when she tried to sneak out early Ended up in tears!
They're well suited! Princess Beatrice and boyfriend Dave Clark step out in matching blazers for a star-studded charity gala in LA
Imogen Poots shows off her kooky sense of style in a Victorian-inspired mint ruffled dress at Green Room film screening in LA A statement dress
Mel B flaunts her cleavage in a plunging keyhole top as she enjoys date night with husband Stephen Belafonte at Mother's Day premiere
Megan Fox and Brian Austin Green 'are living together in rented Bel-Air home'... as divorcing couple expect third child together An on/off relationship
Gwyneth Paltrow shimmers in metallic co-ords at cookbook signing after admitting she'd 'rather smoke crack than eat spray cheese'
'Papa making late snacks': Elsa Pataky shares tender snap of Chris Hemsworth doting on daughter India Rose after premiere of Huntsman: Winter's War
White hot! Pia Miller sizzles in tiny string bikini as she takes a dip in the sea while filming on Home and Away set Plays a police officer in the Aussie soap
Shay Mitchell flaunts her impressive cleavage and svelte curves in a dazzling low-cut gown at the Mother's Day premiere Legs and cleavage!
Now YOU can be a copy Kate: Celebrity hair stylist reveals his guide to recreating the Duchess's most stunning looks from her tour of India and Bhutan
EXCLUSIVE: 'Tiny dancer is just like naughty George,' William told parents of three-year-old Indian boy who charmed Kate by stamping on her feet
Miranda Kerr shows off her endless legs in a black and white embroidered mini dress as she attends drinks launch in Tokyo Looking sensational
Tyga appears to ignore fans taking a selfie as he makes his way through airport... days after girlfriend Kylie Jenner was accused of brushing past fans
EXCLUSIVE 'He's changed just as many dirty nappies as me': Frankie Bridge reveals she's 'lucky' husband Wayne is a hands on dad
'That's me Photoshopped and drunk': Emilia Clark admits she had to be plied with alcohol to strip for World's Sexiest Woman Esquire shoot
Karrueche Tran looks stylish in suede shirt and matching trousers as she poses alongside Chloe Green at Ivy Park launch Chris Brown's ex
Jenson Button's stunning girlfriend Brittny Ward displays her svelte figure in extreme plunging green swimsuit Racy little number
Breast unsupported actress! Ashley Tisdale protects her modesty with nipple covers as she goes braless in sheer top at Mother's Day premiere
Pregnancy yoga helps weary Jools Oliver ahead of arrival of her fifth child She's feeling daunted, writes SEBASTIAN SHAKESPEARE
'Was I even married?' Kris Jenner gets emotional as Caitlyn Jenner admits she has replaced the name Bruce on her birth certificate
Nina Agdal shows off her taut tummy and supermodel stems as she struts her stuff on the streets of Brooklyn for new fashion campaign
Who better? Benedict Cumberbatch set to voice The Grinch in an animated adaptation of the Dr. Seuss Christmas classic  A posh Englishman
Mel B puts on a loving display with her youngest daughter Madison, three... as ex Eddie Murphy reveals his NINTH child will be a baby girl
Surrender! Justin Bieber mocks choking encounter by grabbing Post Malone's throat after rapper tweets they just 'like to rough house' Insist it was a play fight
Revealed at last, the bizarre truth about OJ Simpson and a trial that murdered justice: How gripping court drama has answered many intriguing questions
Bumping along nicely! Pregnant Emily Blunt puts blossoming belly on display in clinging black maxi dress  The 33-year-old is expecting her second
Good golly Josh! Transformers star Duhamel shows off his toned torso as he changes his shirt after training session Lucky Fergie!
Resurgence! New trailer for Shin Godzilla debuts online as fans prepare for his first Japanese film in TWELVE YEARS Godzilla is back in Japan
Heart on his... chest! James Lock shows off tribute tattoo to ex Danielle Armstrong as he FINALLY wins her back with passionate smooch in TOWIE finale
'It was sweet!' Jade Jagger gushes about former step-mother Jerry Hall's wedding to media mogul Rupert Murdoch On friendly terms
Rushing to the altar! Rob Kardashian will 'wed Blac Chyna at the end of the summer in warm destination and have it all filmed for a reality show'
Can't top this! Lamar Odom and Kanye West mingle with the stars as they enjoy a guys' night out at Kobe's final Lakers game  Former bro-in-laws
Damien Hirst's glamorous girlfriend Katie Keight, 25, puts on a leggy display in a metallic side split gown as she enjoys night out with artist beau, 50
Lance Bass reveals on Kocktails With Khloe that his ex 'N SYNC bandmate Justin Timberlake did not invite him to his wedding Missed Italian nuptials
From Brooklyn to Tribeca! Chloe Grace Moretz arrives for Film Festival's opening night... but no sign of rekindled flame Beckham
Lindsay Lohan flashes emerald rock from 'fiancé' Egor Tarabasov... as she spends time with her once-estranged father Michael in NYC
'Congratulations on a legendary career': Taylor Swift leads celebrity tributes to Kobe Bryant in TV special after his last game
Jaime King showcases her VERY slender frame in strapless fishtail gown as she attends Parker Foundation event The 5ft 9in beauty opted for a dramatic silhouette
Lauren Goodger displays EXTREME cleavage as she strips down to nothing but a leather jacket for raciest photoshoot yet She's certainly not shy
He came a-round to the idea! Channing Tatum reveals he has signed up to appear in Kingsman sequel Golden Circle A baddie or a goodie?
What a gent! Hugh Jackman  holds the hand of wife Deborra-Lee Furness after a swim in the ocean during 20th anniversary St. Barts holiday
John Cusack is granted a restraining order against female stalker who threatened to put a curse on his manhood A relief for the actor
'My reason for living': Ariel Winter looks slim in new snap as she explains meaning behind those FIVE initials tattooed on her rib cage
She's a living masterpiece! Karolina Kurkova steals the show in off the shoulder top at art documentary premiere opening Tribeca Film Festival
They're inseparable! Kristen Stewart and girlfriend Soko Sokolinski hold hands on sunny stroll in New York Head over heels
'My breath smelled terrible': Nick Jonas reveals he gave Miley Cyrus a first kiss she will never forget outside pizza parlour Fond memories
She's ice cold! Hailey Baldwin flashes flat tummy in a crop top as she sips on a cold drink The 19-year-old model looked the epitome of summer fashion
A new live action Peter Pan movie is in the works... after last year's attempt at telling origin story bombed at the box office Ready for another one?
Little By Little! Noel Gallagher's wife Sara MacDonald opts for low-key glamour as she takes rocker's lookalike sons to Jungle Book premiere in London
Pixie Lott springs into style in a floral blue bomber and skinny jeans ahead of her Breakfast At Tiffany's show in Manchester Plays Holly Golightly
From Batman to Birdman to bad man! Michael Keaton 'cast as villain in new Spider-Man movie'... 24 years after last starring as Caped Crusader
A weed pipe and anti-bacterial spray: Kim Kardashian's guide to essentials for Coachella music festival Her must-have list for the music festival 
A real sister act! Jessica Wright shows some skin in an LBD as she hits the red carpet with younger sibling Natalya at the premiere of The Jungle Book
Hailee Steinfeld dons Missoni swimwear for poolside spread... and reveals the meaning behind her song Love Myself Loving life
Something kinda see-throoooh! Nicola Roberts dons a chic and sheer floral bomber as she head to fashion bash Red hot!
Alessandra Ambrosio sports suede mini-skirt while buying herself a belated birthday present at Isabel Marant The 35-year-old showed off her legs
Who will win the Solo cup? Alden Ehrenreich skips ahead of Jack Reynor and Taron Egerton for lead in Star Wars spinoff Coveted role
Boho babe! Goldie Hawn, 70, flashes a little cleavage in silk maxi dress as she supports Parker Institute launch  She may be 70, but she looks a lot younger
Their other baby! Coco Rocha launches Co + Co sportswear line in her Toronto hometown with husband James Conran Fashion model is turning to business
Revealed: Joker Jared Leto sent sex toys and USED CONDOMS to Suicide Squad co-stars during filming Shock confession at CinemaCon
'She's ready to move on': Khloe Kardashian 'plans on refiling for divorce soon' as Lamar Odom continues to make 'bad choices' Figuring out finances
Kiss and tell! Amber Rose, 32, debuts new boyfriend Terrence Ross, 25, in lusty Snapchat video after having dated for only two months
SEBASTIAN SHAKESPEARE: Prince's pals Ant & Cheque are raking in £19,500 a day  That's certainly a princely sum
Someone better be able to keep a secret! Outrage as Game Of Thrones creators admit giving Obama advanced episodes of the new season
Flawless and fabulous! Kylie Jenner has not a hair out of place as she wears head-to-toe black to film Keeping Up With The Kardashians Simply stunning
TV presenter Anna Williamson reveals she's pregnant as she proudly shows off her bump in royal blue dress alongside husband Alex Di Pasquale at premiere
Rob Kardashian insists his family is 'very happy' he's engaged to Blac Chyna... even though they STILL haven't congratulated him
The thigh's the limit! Hilary Duff wears revealing asymmetrical skirt while out to brunch with pals in West Hollywood Nice hat, Hilary?
If you've got it, flaunt it! Nikki Reed shows off her lovely legs in a green mini dress as she arrives at Extra studios Actress, 27, flashed her enviable legs 
'I basically just keep my mouth shut': Sylvester Stallone jokes about being 'tenderized' by wife and three daughters during a visit to The Ellen Show
Make-up free Jessie J slips into animal print bikini as she protects her porcelain complexion beneath a baseball cap during Miami break
Baby joy! Ellie Kemper announces she's pregnant on The Tonight Show after telling Tina Fey about the baby before her own mother
'Five good summers left': Carole Radziwill admits to Bethenny Frankel that she loves toyboy but may not settle down on Real Housewives Of NY
Fashionably late to the game! Notoriously private twins Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen share their FIRST EVER public selfie Tres chic, obviously
'So far so good!' Kim Zolciak flashes flat belly as she updates fans on tea detox program with mirror selfie  How she keeps her figure in check
'Don't go': Natalie Woods' daughter Natasha recalls 'funny feeling' before mother's tragic drowning on sailing trip with Robert Wagner
Walk on the wild side: Elle Macpherson rocks fake fur coat and zebra-print bag as she run errands in NYC Proved she still has what it takes
Totally out there, man! Kimberly Wyatt shows off toned figure in kooky psychedelic dress and knee-high boots as she party hops with husband Max Rogers
Basketball player Kobe Bryant receives fond farewells on social media from luminaries ranging from David Beckham to Bill Clinton paying tribute
The Rock welcomes 'bad a**' Charlize Theron to cast of Fast 8 after she signs on to play a new villain Newest member of the team
'There was a different energy': Chris Hemsworth reveals his brood and Charlize Theron's kids changed the dynamics on The Huntsman sequel
'He is handsome and very masculine': Naomi Watts says she felt a 'strong attraction' to partner Liev Schreiber when they first met nine years ago
Thrifty Princess Mary recycles stunning red gown for a palace dinner with the Mexican President... and proudly wears tiara fashioned from an old necklace
So fly! Kate Upton is biker chic in leather jacket and skinny jeans as she jets into LA with her dog Harley The 23-year-old starlet kept it casual
Avert thy eyes! New Game Of Thrones interactive credits allows fans to discover what is underneath Titan Of Braavos' skirt Colossus discovery
'Sun kissed, scruffy and sweaty': Kimberley Garner displays slender physique in sports bra and tiny shorts as she enjoys Malibu hike with her gal pals
'It gets dark out there': Sir Ben Kingsley blasts claims The Jungle Book is 'too scary' for kids... insisting it can help prepare them for the real world
'Her name is LiLo and she dances with the band!' Lindsay Lohan joins Duran Duran on stage for a singsong... after celebrating engagement at NYC gig
Down to 12! Adam Levine and Christina Aguilera struggle to decide as The Voice USA halves the field to final dozen singers The big axe dropped
Racy TV actress Ruth Wilson covers up in edgy velvet co-ord as she breaks away from some of the revealing ensembles at new underwear exhibition
Rocco Ritchie rocks a Hawaiian shirt as he enjoys laid-back skateboarding session with pals on London's Southbank He's got skills 
Now CARA's getting the London look: Ms Delevingne follows in Kate Moss's footsteps as the new face of Rimmel Quite the coup
Coachella ready! Vanessa Hudgens gets $190 Swarovski crystal and marijuana leaf manicure ahead of  music festival She's nailed it
Holly Willoughby and This Morning co-stars pay tribute to beloved agony aunt Denise Robertson (after broadcasting live from outside the church)
'Here's to you Mrs Robertson!': Eamonn Holmes and wife Ruth Langsford raise a glass to their late colleague Denise Final farewell
The Kate Middleton of the Himalayas: How a beautiful pilot's daughter stole the King of Bhutan's heart - and will meet the royal who inspired her nickname
'I don't give a f***!' Selena Gomez reveals why she does not care what people think of her mistakes and will never use not having a normal childhood as an excuse 
Walk on the wild side! Padma Lakshmi glams it up in leopard print coat and sexy thigh-high boots Put on a saucy display in NYC
John Cusack puts oceanfront Malibu home on the market for an eye watering $13.5m... or $75,000-a-month if you want to try before you buy
Rocker chic! Olivia Wilde looks stylish in leather motorcycle jacket and flared jeans The 32-year-old looked stylish in a black leather motorcycle jacket
Ferne McCann returns to her energetic reporting duties on This Morning in a slit midi-skirt and vampy red heels... after wading into body-shaming row
But who's the style queen? Princess Mary of Denmark wears a chic two-tone coat to welcome the glamorous First Lady of Mexico to Scandinavia
'It's odd to look try to look like my pre-baby self': Zooey Deschanel says new moms shouldn't put themselves under pressure to lose weight
Disney star Debby Ryan 'arrested for driving under the influence' after allegedly crashing into another car and injuring the driver
Lady in red! Insta-famous model and blogger Natasha Oakley flaunts her ample cleavage in plunging off-the-shoulder dress as she poses for sexy snap
'Hire a white man as the face of your companies': Bethenny Frankel shocks crowd at New York business event designed to empower women 
Head Start to Home Cooked
Get Recipes
more
SHARE PICTURE
Copy link to paste in your message
Find out more...
Find out more...
Back to top
Home
U.K.
News
Sports
U.S. Showbiz
Australia
Femail
Health
Science
Money
Video
Travel
Columnists
Sitemap Archive Video Archive Topics Index Mobile Apps Screensaver RSS Text-based site Reader Prints Our Papers Top of page
Daily Mail Mail on Sunday This is Network This is Money
Metro Jobsite Mail Travel Zoopla.co.uk Prime Location
Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd
Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday & Metro Media Group
© Associated Newspapers Ltd Contact us How to complain Advertise with us Syndication Work with Us Terms Privacy policy & cookies
 
 
 