JAN
APR
AUG
11
2015
2016
2017
22 captures
26 Oct 10 - 27 Sep 16
Close Help
Frisch–Peierls memorandum
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to: navigation , search
University of Birmingham - Poynting Physics Building - blue plaque to phyicists Frisch and Peierls
The Frisch–Peierls memorandum was the first technical exposition of a practical atomic weapon . [1] Written by Otto Frisch and Rudolf Peierls in March 1940 while they were both working at the University of Birmingham in England, the memorandum contained new calculations about the size of the critical mass needed for an atomic bomb , and helped accelerate British and U.S. efforts towards bomb development during World War II .
Contents
1 Background and influence
2 Contents
3 See also
4 References
5 External links
Background and influence[ edit ]
Given to Marcus Oliphant , Oliphant passed the document on to Henry Tizard , chairman of the Committee on the Scientific Survey of Air Defence who consequently requested the setting-up of what was to become the secret MAUD Committee . The memorandum (a copy of which is held in the Public Record Office at Kew) is dated March 1940.
The two men were the first to calculate that an atomic bomb would require about 1 kilogram (2.2 lb) of the isotope uranium-235 . [2] (The estimate of 1 kg turned out to be too low; see Critical mass .) Before it had been assumed that the bomb itself would require many tons of uranium, implying that it was theoretically possible, but not a practical military device. An earlier letter to President Franklin D. Roosevelt , signed by Albert Einstein (but written by Leó Szilárd ), had suggested it may need to be delivered by ship but "might very well" not be small enough to drop from the air.
The memorandum helped galvanize both Britain and America down a path which led to a report by the British MAUD Committee , the Tube Alloys project, the Manhattan Project , and ultimately the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki .
Contents[ edit ]
The memo was written in two parts. The second was an explanation of the science supporting their conclusions. The first was an elegant and comprehensive outline of the implications of their calculations. It included a proposal that the best defence against such a weapon would be to develop one before Germany did so. In a few short pages these two scientists had anticipated the policies of deterrence which would later shape Cold War geopolitics .
The memorandum opens with:
Strictly Confidential
Memorandum on the properties of a radioactive “super-bomb”
The attached detailed report concerns the possibility of constructing a “super-bomb” which utilizes the energy stored in atomic nuclei as a source of energy. The energy liberated in the explosion of such a super-bomb is about the same as that produced by the explosion of 1000 tons of dynamite. This energy is liberated in a small volume, in which it will, for an instant, produce a temperature comparable to that in the interior of the sun. The blast from such an explosion would destroy life in a wide area. The size of this area is difficult to estimate, but it will probably cover the centre of a big city.
In addition, some part of the energy set free by the bomb goes to produce radioactive substances, and these will emit very powerful and dangerous radiations. The effect of these radiations is greatest immediately after the explosion, but it decays only gradually and even for days after the explosion any person entering the affected area will be killed.
Some of this radioactivity will be carried along with the wind and will spread the contamination; several miles downwind this may kill people.
See also[ edit ]
Einstein–Szilárd letter
Timeline of the Manhattan Project
Allied technological cooperation during World War II
References[ edit ]
^
Kelly, Cynthia C. (2004). Remembering The Manhattan Project: Perspectives on the Making of the Atomic Bomb and Its Legacy . World Scientific. p. 44. ISBN   9812560408 . Retrieved 2012-09-30.
 
^ "The energy liberated by a 5 kg bomb would be equivalent to that of several thousand tons of dynamite, while that of a 1 kg bomb, though about 500 times less, would still be formidable."
Frisch-Peierls Memorandum, March 1940 , retrieved 2011-12-04
 
World Nuclear Association — Outline History of Nuclear Energy
External links[ edit ]
Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Frisch-Peierls memorandum
Stanford University — The Frisch–Peierls memorandum ( PDF )
Frisch and Peierls's second memorandum
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frisch–Peierls_memorandum&oldid=706772737 "
Categories :
Nuclear history of the United Kingdom
Nuclear history of the United States
Classified documents
World War II documents
1940 works
Memoranda
Navigation menu
Personal tools
Not logged in
Talk
Contributions
Create account
Log in
Namespaces
Article
Talk
Variants
Views
Read
Edit
View history
More
Search
Navigation
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version
Languages
Deutsch
Français
Italiano
Nederlands
Norsk bokmål
Edit links
This page was last modified on 25 February 2016, at 05:35.
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License ; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Developers
Cookie statement
Mobile view