OCT
APR
May
10
2013
2016
2017
14 captures
1 Aug 12 - 10 Apr 16
Close Help
Ruins of the Manhattan project: Haunting images show the remnants of mission to build first atomic bomb during World War II
 
Home
U.K.
    News
Sports
U.S. Showbiz
Australia
Femail
Health
Science
Money
Video
Travel
Columnists
Latest Headlines
News
World News
Arts
Headlines
Pictures
Most read
News Board
Wires
My Profile
Logout
Login
Feedback
DailyMail
Home Top
show ad
Was it revenge? Father of gunman who killed former Saints player Will Smith was shot dead by cops in 2005 - and the footballer had been dining with an officer named in the lawsuit just hours before
Female Texas teacher is arrested after being caught on film repeatedly hitting a male student around the head - then mocking him when he complains
Texas's oldest death row inmate dies of natural causes after 38 years waiting to be executed
Taliban claims John Kerry was the target of rocket attacks during unplanned state visit to Afghanistan to address volatile security 
EXCLUSIVE: Police files reveal accused murderer of UT ballerina was diagnosed with schizophrenia, autism and depression and beaten by his grandmother 
Masters leaderboard 2016 LIVE: Day four action with Jordan Spieth, Rory McIlroy, Jason Day and Co at Augusta National 
Burger King employees in Minnesota AND Oklahoma duped into smashing up their restaurants - causing more than $10,000 damage - by prank a caller pretending to be from fire department
Terror group which launched Brussels bombings were planning NEW attack on Paris say prosecutors
ISIS 'sends large number of experienced terrorists to northern Libya to carry out major attack on oil wells' 
Don't mess with Grandma! Shocking video emerges of woman threatening to cut her rude grandson with a KNIFE 
Locked and loaded: Runaway 13-year-old boy with a handgun for 'protection' is nabbed by NYPD as he gets off bus from Virginia
ANOTHER reason for stressed parents to fear the 'terrible twos': A screaming toddler could be on their way to a life of crime 
Elementary school teacher is sacked after video of her twerking in a bikini in Mexico sweeps the web and is spotted by outraged parents
Off-duty Philadelphia SWAT cop 'justified' in shooting and killing armed robbery suspect, investigators say
Police hunt two Brazilian bank robbers who wrapped themselves head-to-toe in TINFOIL in successful bid to beat alarm system 
'I'll just take a cab': SNL mocks Hillary Clinton's love of New York and subway mishap in hilarious skit
Bernie Sanders says being Jewish means he understands racism as he gives talk alongside Eric Garner's daughter in Harlem
Hillary Clinton slams President Obama's bid to slash New York City's anti-terror funding by $90 MILLION
President Obama says Hillary 'has not jeopardized' national security in email case saying she did an 'outstanding job' as secretary of state
Hillary Clinton tries to explain Bill's Black Lives Matter outburst: 'He believes that people need to talk and listen to each other'  
William and Kate bring smiles to the faces of Mumbai's 'slumdog' children as they meet some of the poorest people on Earth in the latest stop on their royal tour of India 
Paisley prints, sari chic and eye-catching jewellery: Kate shows off her Indian-inspired wardrobe on the first day of the royal tour 
Over 100 people have been killed and 200 more injured in massive fire at Hindu temple in India during fireworks display
Don't get on the wrong side of mom! Amazing pictures show mother warthog fighting off LEOPARD trying to snatch its baby 
Previous
Next
Nuclear decay: Haunting images show the remnants of the Manhattan Project mission to build first atomic bomb
By Daily Mail Reporter
Published: 21:41 EST, 31 July 2012 | Updated: 07:23 EST, 1 August 2012
28
View
comments
It's almost 70 years since America ushered in the atomic age and, as the threat of nuclear weapons remains, the remnants of the Manhattan Project are still visible across the United states.
Photographer Martin Miller traveled to two nuclear-explosives production facilities constructed during the infamous mission to build the world's first atomic bomb - a uranium production plant in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, and a full-scale plutonium protection reactor in Hanford, Washington.
His incredible photographs document the stark, now abandoned sites, where between 1939 and 1945 America's top scientists developed 'The Gadget', as it was code-named throughout its development, and explosives used in the nuclear weapons detonated over Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Japan.
Explosive work: The B Reactor Control Console which was completed in Hanford Nuclear Reservation, Washington in 1944 and used to source plutonium for the Nagasaki Bomb
The Manhattan Project was sparked when Albert Einstein  wrote to then President Franklin D. Roosevelt informing him that Nazi  Germany was working towards a  similar end-game. The U.S. government almost immediately expedited research into developing a viable atomic bomb.
Mr Miller said it was difficult to visit the historic sites 'without experiencing a sense of awe at what was accomplished'.
RELATED ARTICLES
Previous
1
Next
Is this Atlantis?: Photographer creates magnificent...
Share this article
Share
'The scientific, engineering,  managerial, labor, and logistical challenges that were met and overcome  are separately impressive but, taken together, simply astonishing.'
But he added that appreciation of the  monumental achievements of the Manhattan Project could not be considered 'without a pang of regret at what it unleashed into the world.'
Engineering feat: A modern day photograph shows the outside of the reactor at the Hanford Nuclear Reservation, which was completed in 1944
B Reactor Front Face, Source of Nagasaki Bomb Plutonium, Hanford Nuclear Reservation, WA 1944
After six years of work, at 5:29am on  July 16, 1945, the first atomic bomb was detonated in a white blaze that  stretched from the basin of the Jemez Mountains in northern New Mexico  to the still-dark skies.
As the orange fireball shot upwards at  360 feet per second before forming the characteristic mushroom cloud of  radioactive vapor at 30,000 feet, the U.S. government's good intentions  had given birth to the monstrous reality that still hangs over  civilisation.
An untested uranium bomb was then  dropped on Hiroshima, while a plutonium bomb was dropped on Nagasaki,  causing the Japanese to surrender.
Ready to blow: Left, the 'Fat Man' 21-kT Atomic Bomb from 1945 which was later dropped on Nagasaki. Right, 'The Gadget' 19-kT Atomic Bomb also from 1945
At work: A historical picture taken during the plants' working years show two men at the 'gaseous diffusion converter'
Exacting work: The 'Calutron Girls' at their control panels where electromagnetic separation was accomplished during the gathering of uranium
B Reactor Valve Pit Controlling Cooling Water, Hanford Nuclear Reservation, WA 1944
Gable Mountain Plutonium Vault, Hanford Nuclear Reservation, WA 1944
B Plant Entrance No. 15, Hanford Nuclear Reservation, WA 1944
Electrical Substation and B Reactor, Hanford Nuclear Reservation, WA 1944
These were the astonishing sites where the bombs were developed with two billion dollars, years of labour and expert engineering.
Clinton Engineering Works in  Tennessee was the site of several plants that concentrated the rare  uranium isotope, U235 from the more abundant U238, Miller explained.  Machines known as calutrons completed electromagnetic separation and the U235 was later used in the Hiroshima bomb.
The advanced processes were carried  out at the U-shaped building which measured nearly a mile around and  enclosed hundreds of miles of piping - making it the largest building in  the world at the time of its construction. It was followed by five more  buildings over the next decade.
Railroad Tracks and B Reactor, Source of Nagasaki Bomb Plutonium, Hanford Nuclear Reservation, WA 1944
Hot Reactor-Product Rail Cars and Storage Bldg, Hanford Nuclear Reservation, WA 1944
A modern day photograph shows the Emergency Air Sphere at the K-31 and K-33 Gaseous Diffusion Uranium Enrichment Plants in Tennessee, which were completed in 1951 and 1954
B Plant for Chemically Separating Plutonium from Reactor Products, Hanford Nuclear Reservation, WA 1944
K-31 Cell Floor, Gaseous Diffusion Uranium Enrichment Plant, Oak Ridge, TN 1951
Gable Mountain Plutonium Vaults, Hanford Nuclear Reservation, WA 1944
The Hanford Engineering Works in Washington worked to create plutonium on a massive scale by bombarding U238 with neutrons originating from fission of U235.  Chemicals, operated by remote control, were then used to separate out  the plutonium.
Throughout the Cold War, six more reactors were built, yet all are now  deactivated. Hanford is now striving to minimize the future consequences  of the plutonium production but it is impossible to restore the land to  its former state.
After the uranium and plutonium was gathered, it was used in the bomb assemly in Los Alamos, New Mexico.
Accomplishment: A historical photograph shows the chemistry building in 1944, part of the plants which were built when the U.S heard the Nazis were planning something similar
World changing: A female worker sits before the Beta calutron control panel
Control Console, X-10 Pilot Plant for Production of Nagasaki Bomb Plutonium, Oak Ridge, TN 1943
Alpha Calutrons Pump Side, 1st-Stage Source of Hiroshima Bomb Uranium, Oak Ridge, TN 1943
Alpha Calutrons, 1st-Stage Source of Hiroshima Bomb Uranium, Oak Ridge, TN 1943
X-10 Reactor, Pilot Plant for Production of Nagasaki Bomb Plutonium, Oak Ridge, TN 1943
Beta Calutrons, 2nd-Stage Source of Hiroshima Bomb Uranium, Oak Ridge, TN 1943
K-25 North Building, Gaseous Diffusion Plant for Hiroshima-Bomb Uranium Enrichment, Oak Ridge, TN 1945
K-25 West Leg, Gaseous Diffusion Plant for Hiroshima-Bomb Uranium Enrichment, Oak Ridge, TN 1945
Switchyard and K-27 Gaseous Diffusion Plant for Uranium Enrichment, Oak Ridge, TN 1945-46
Read more:
Behance Network: Slouching towards Bethlehem ...
WMD Manhattan Project Color
Share or comment on this article
B reactor is now preserved as a museum, it has not ...
by DD 73
MOST WATCHED NEWS VIDEOS
Previous
1
2
Next
Eye-watering moment a matador is gored in the buttocks
Primary school teacher sacked over this 'inappropriate'...
Southern mother shoots then sledgehammers children's phone
Caught on video: Texas teacher arrested after hitting a...
SNL has fun with Clinton's subway gaffe earlier this week
Man manages to stay alive by screaming at oncoming bear
Duchess Kate bats a few bowls in Mumbai cricket game
Al Sharpton talks about approval rating of each candidate
'What the f**k?': Terrified boy haunted by ghost in bedroom
Don't mess with Grandma: Seriously don't, she'll cut you!
Skier effortlessly zips through trees and negotiates huge...
Heart- warming moment Joe a wild monkey is rescued from...
Erotic sex and the 'pursuit of pleasure' between couples is...
Was it revenge? Father of gunman who killed former Saints...
Bullseye! The VERY eye-watering moment a matador is gored in...
'Deportations to begin': Boston Globe unveils lampoon Trump...
Hit for six! Nimble Kate keeps on her towering wedges to...
'This is the only birthday that I have had with people...
'I hereby denounce the effects social media have on my...
The Bombay blues: Kate dazzles in beaded gown and matching...
Married Air Force commander with two children 'went out...
'This is what “New York values” are really all about': Trump...
Primary school teacher is sacked after video of her twerking...
British mother and her son who enjoy 'mind-blowing sex'...
MOST READ NEWS
Previous
Next
●
●
Comments (28)
Share what you think
Newest
Oldest
Best rated
Worst rated
 View all
The comments below have not been moderated.
 View all
The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline.
We are no longer accepting comments on this article.
Who is this week's top commenter? Find out now
More top stories
SHARE PICTURE
Copy link to paste in your message
Find out more...
Find out more...
Back to top
Home
U.K.
News
Sports
U.S. Showbiz
Australia
Femail
Health
Science
Money
Video
Travel
Columnists
Sitemap Archive Video Archive Topics Index Mobile Apps Screensaver RSS Text-based site Reader Prints Our Papers Top of page
Daily Mail Mail on Sunday This is Network This is Money
Metro Jobsite Mail Travel Zoopla.co.uk Prime Location
Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd
Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday & Metro Media Group
© Associated Newspapers Ltd Contact us How to complain Advertise with us Syndication Work with Us Terms Privacy policy & cookies
 
 
 