Blue skies and sunshine with threatening dark clouds
Walk Notes
The storm surge on 5th/6th December 2013 caused a lot of damage to the area around Cley and Blakeney as evidenced during an earlier walk, detailed at The Aftermath of the 2013 Storm Surge - Blakeney, Cley and Salthouse .
Returning during August 2014, it would appear that repair works are in progress although the long term future of both the Blakeney Freshes and the Coast Path around them is uncertain.
Currently there are several parts of the flood defence banks that the Coast Path follows that have breaches already repaired, albeit the height of the defence bank is distinctly lower than its previous incarnation.
A diversion is currently in place across the marsh as works are being undertaken along the northern side of the defences.
There is also a major breach adjacent to Blakeney Quay where the current footpath diverts onto the beach area in front of Blakeney.
It is good to see access once again available, especially as reports earlier in the year were implying that the repair work was seriously in doubt due to lack of funding.
The Environment Agency, the authority in charge of the area, offered a July update on the matter which is available at www.norfolkcoastaonb.org.uk/mediaps/pdfuploads/pd003272.pdf .
This details the meetings and responses from the various concerned parties who have a stake in the area.
The end of the update concludes with the heading 'What Happens Next' which states:
We believe it is inevitable that the habitats of the Blakeney Freshes are going to change over time in response to sea level rise.
However, we want to take all practical steps to secure the existing site features for the short term and then to work with owners and occupiers to encourage new nature conservation interests to evolve.
We have concluded from our investigations that the best and most sustainable approach is to repair the damaged embankment with a profile which has a lower and wider crest and shallower slopes.
This will be more resilient to damage during any future surge events than the previous embankment design.
We also want to reduce the time that saltwater stands on the marshes and we are looking into improvements to the existing sluices and drainage system.
Our intention now is to make progress quickly in order to have a reasonable defence standard in place before the high tides forecast in the autumn.
We are planning to be     on site in early August and we will issue fact sheets with more details before we start.
It is pleasing to know that this delightful walk is being reinstated although with the defence bank being lower the risk over over-topping is increased with more frequent flooding expected which may well render the coast path along this section inaccessible at certain times.
In the longer term, the reference to 'sea level change' appears to imply that eventually this area will be lost to the sea, with the resulting loss of the present route the coast path takes.
This remains to be seen.
Even so, whether the long term results in the loss of the route or whether short term flooding leaves the route inaccessible for short periods of time, there are a few reasonable alternatives that enable the walker to perambulate between the two villages:
Follow the A149 road route - The road between Blakeney and Cley has a pavement throughout the distance.
Although this presents a safe solution to walking the road,  it is nonetheless not the most pleasant of routes as the road tends to be busy particularly during the summer months.
Diversion through Wiveton - Walking from Blakeney, this takes a permissive path along the edge of the marsh to Wiveton Hall before heading up to the road and straight across to follow the quiet lanes into Wiveton.
Taking the lane across Wiveton bridge will then lead into Cle.
There is a lane from the church down into the village which circumvents having to negotiate the congested main road through the village.
Altogether this is a most pleasant and rewarding alternative with added features of both Wiveton and Cley churches plus two pubs along the route.
The downside is that the permissive path, across National Trust land known as Friary Hills, may not always be open.
The route will be detailed on this site in the coming months.
Diversion across Wiveton Downs - although not strictly speaking a coast path route, and certainly a little longer than the official route, this nonetheless has some spectacular views of the coast from Wiveton Downs which makes it well worth the effort.
The route heads south out of Cley, and then uses quiet lanes, footpaths and the permissive path across the downs and back down to the Coast Path  between Blakeney and Morston.
Features include a ford across the river Glaven and the Shell museum at Glandford but the best feature are the stunning views when one gets onto the downs.
Full details of this route can be found at Inland Walk between Cley and Blakeney .