Mar
APR
May
7
2015
2016
2017
2 captures
6 Apr 16 - 7 Apr 16
Close Help
Griffmonsters Great Walks
Route details, maps, pubs, features, local history and folklore for a wide variety of walks focusing primarily on Norfolk and Suffolk
Regional Walks
Suffolk
Bury & Stowmarket
Diss & Harleston
Ipswich & Felixstowe
Southwold & Bungay
Woodbridge & Saxmundham
Norfolk
East Dereham & Aylsham
Kings Lynn & Downham Market
Norfolk Coast Central
Norfolk Coast East
Norfolk Coast West
Norwich
The Brecks
The Broads
Bedfordshire
Bucks
Cambs
Essex
Herts
Lincs
South West
The North
Long Distance Trails
Suffolk
Angles Way
East Suffolk Line Path
Sandlings
Suffolk Coast Path
Norfolk
Norfolk Coast Path
Paston Way
Peddars Way
Weavers Way
Cross Norfolk Trail
Nar Valley Way
Wherrymans Way
Wensum Way
South West Coast Path
Icknield Way
England Coast Path
Walk Maps
Suffolk Walks Map
Norfolk Walks Map
News
Thursday, 28 August 2014
Norfolk Coast Path between Blakeney and Cley - Latest Developments
Author:
griff chamberlain  | 
Thursday, 28 August 2014  |  2 comments  | 
The future of the 2.5 mile walk along the sea defences between Cley and Blakeney
The December 2013 Storm Surge caused major damage to the sea defences along the Norfolk Coast Path that encompasses the Blakeney Freshes. Work is currently being carried out to repair the breaches, however the long term future of both the Freshes and the coast path at this point is uncertain.
Notes
Directions
Pubs
Features
Images
Maps
Cley to Blakeney Norfolk Coast Path Walk - Essential Information
Walk Statistics:
Start point
Cley View in OS Map |
View in Google Map
End Point
Blakeney View in OS Map |
View in Google Map
Total Walk distance
2.5 miles
Walk difficulty
Easy
Terrain
Footpath along flood defences throughout
Obstacles
There is currently a diversion across some of the marsh that can be muddy.
Maps:
OS Explorer Map
OS Explorer 252 - Norfolk Coast East
OS Route Map
Full screen plot of route on an OS map
OSM Route Map
Full screen plot of route on an OpenStreetMap map
Google Route Map
Full screen plot of route on a Google map
GPX file for walk
Downloadable GPX coordinates of walk
Accommodation:
Galley Hill Campsite, Blakeney View in OS Map |
View in Google Map
Website
http://www.glavenvalley.co.uk/galleyhillcamping/
Description
Set in area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, Galley Hill Farm Campsite welcomes tents, trailer tents & small campervans. A quiet site located one mile from Blakeney quay. Toilets & shower facilities.
Transport:
Norfolk Green - Bus Service
Service Number
Coasthopper - An excellent way to get around the North Norfolk Coast. This service provides a frequent and friendly means of transportation and some drivers provide local information and even poetry as you ride!
Timetable
http://www.coasthopper.co.uk/times.aspx
Walk Data
Date of Walk
2014-08-22
Walk Time
14:30 to 16:30
Walkers
Griffmonster, Kat
Weather Conditions
Blue skies and sunshine with threatening dark clouds
Walk Notes
The storm surge on 5th/6th December 2013 caused a lot of damage to the area around Cley and Blakeney as evidenced during an earlier walk, detailed at The Aftermath of the 2013 Storm Surge - Blakeney, Cley and Salthouse . Returning during August 2014, it would appear that repair works are in progress although the long term future of both the Blakeney Freshes and the Coast Path around them is uncertain. Currently there are several parts of the flood defence banks that the Coast Path follows that have breaches already repaired, albeit the height of the defence bank is distinctly lower than its previous incarnation. A diversion is currently in place across the marsh as works are being undertaken along the northern side of the defences. There is also a major breach adjacent to Blakeney Quay where the current footpath diverts onto the beach area in front of Blakeney. It is good to see access once again available, especially as reports earlier in the year were implying that the repair work was seriously in doubt due to lack of funding.
The Environment Agency, the authority in charge of the area, offered a July update on the matter which is available at www.norfolkcoastaonb.org.uk/mediaps/pdfuploads/pd003272.pdf . This details the meetings and responses from the various concerned parties who have a stake in the area. The end of the update concludes with the heading 'What Happens Next' which states:
We believe it is inevitable that the habitats of the Blakeney Freshes are going to change over time in response to sea level rise. However, we want to take all practical steps to secure the existing site features for the short term and then to work with owners and occupiers to encourage new nature conservation interests to evolve.
We have concluded from our investigations that the best and most sustainable approach is to repair the damaged embankment with a profile which has a lower and wider crest and shallower slopes. This will be more resilient to damage during any future surge events than the previous embankment design. We also want to reduce the time that saltwater stands on the marshes and we are looking into improvements to the existing sluices and drainage system.
Our intention now is to make progress quickly in order to have a reasonable defence standard in place before the high tides forecast in the autumn. We are planning to be     on site in early August and we will issue fact sheets with more details before we start.
It is pleasing to know that this delightful walk is being reinstated although with the defence bank being lower the risk over over-topping is increased with more frequent flooding expected which may well render the coast path along this section inaccessible at certain times. In the longer term, the reference to 'sea level change' appears to imply that eventually this area will be lost to the sea, with the resulting loss of the present route the coast path takes. This remains to be seen.
Even so, whether the long term results in the loss of the route or whether short term flooding leaves the route inaccessible for short periods of time, there are a few reasonable alternatives that enable the walker to perambulate between the two villages:
Follow the A149 road route - The road between Blakeney and Cley has a pavement throughout the distance. Although this presents a safe solution to walking the road,  it is nonetheless not the most pleasant of routes as the road tends to be busy particularly during the summer months.
Diversion through Wiveton - Walking from Blakeney, this takes a permissive path along the edge of the marsh to Wiveton Hall before heading up to the road and straight across to follow the quiet lanes into Wiveton. Taking the lane across Wiveton bridge will then lead into Cle. There is a lane from the church down into the village which circumvents having to negotiate the congested main road through the village. Altogether this is a most pleasant and rewarding alternative with added features of both Wiveton and Cley churches plus two pubs along the route. The downside is that the permissive path, across National Trust land known as Friary Hills, may not always be open.  The route will be detailed on this site in the coming months.
Diversion across Wiveton Downs - although not strictly speaking a coast path route, and certainly a little longer than the official route, this nonetheless has some spectacular views of the coast from Wiveton Downs which makes it well worth the effort. The route heads south out of Cley, and then uses quiet lanes, footpaths and the permissive path across the downs and back down to the Coast Path  between Blakeney and Morston. Features include a ford across the river Glaven and the Shell museum at Glandford but the best feature are the stunning views when one gets onto the downs. Full details of this route can be found at Inland Walk between Cley and Blakeney .
Return to top  
Footpath diversion along the north side of the Freshes
Directions
Beach walk between Cley and Blakeney
The path leads up the embankment on the westward side of Cley village before leading out across the marshes along the defence banks.
Return to top  
Defence banks reduced in height at Cley
Pubs
Kings Arms, Blakeney View in OS Map |
View in Google Map
Address
Westgate Street, Blakeney
Website
www.blakeneykingsarms.co.uk/
The pub is recognisable, when approaching from the coast road heading towards the quay, by the distinct characters spelled out in black on the red pantile roofing declaring 'FH 1760'. The 1760 is a reference to when the roof was replaced, however the reason for initials 'FH' are lost in time although it is thought they may have referred to the then owner. There is also speculation that this was the date that the building first became an Inn but the name of the appears to refer back to earlier times. Many pubs obtained royal names after the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 after a period of Puritan rule. This is also borne out in the royal crest which is displayed on the southern wall of the building.
The interior is decorated with memorabilia of old musical hall stars and movie posters. This highlights the career of the former pub owner, Howard Davies, who had  a long career which included working with the Black and White minstrels as well as appearing in acting parts for both television and films. Additional items on display are numerous clocks which reflect Howards lifelong interest in horology. Sadly Mr Davies passed away in 2010, but the pub has been retained within the family and is now managed by his son Nic.
The pub is  renowned for its fish and seafood dishes and have a specials board that changes daily. Ale from Greene King plus gravity fed barrels of ale from Woodfordes that sit under cooling jackets behind the bar.
Review
The pub is quite compact  but always busy and the barstaff friendly. I have to admit that recent offerings of Woodfordes Wherry have not fulfilled expetations, but the offering from this pub, straight from the barrel, restored some faith in the fine ale. A rewarding and refreshing well kept pint.
Return to top  
Defence works in progress on the northern side of Blakeney Freshes
Features
Blakeney Chapel View in OS Map |
View in Google Map
On the northward side of the marshes at the point where the Coast Path turns westwards towards Blakeney is the location of the old Blakeney Chapel. The site is to the north of the River Glaven and is therefore unreachable from the coast path with little to view apart from a information board to point out its whereabouts.           Despite its name, Blakeney Chapel is not in the parish of Blakeney but Cley and even its use as a chapel is rather dubious. Old maps depict it as a chapel but there is no documentary  or archaeological evidence to  support the claim of any religious function with the only clue to its use being a small hearth which it has been suggested could imply was for smelting iron.           Its first appearance on a map was in 1586 where the building was depicted but unnamed. By 1769 a map by Cranefields displayed the buidling as "Eye House" but by 1797 William Faden's map names the building as Chapel ruins, a name which has stuck to the present time.          Little of the structure remains apart from the foundations, the original building material probably carried off for reuse in the buildings of Cley and Blakeney. Today the ruins are protected as a scheduled monument although there is no active management. With increasing sea levels and constant erosion with a steady migration southwards of the beachside shingle bank it is thought the ruins will soon be buried and then lost to the sea.
References
Blakeney Chapel
Official website for Blakeney Chapel
Return to top  
Defence bank at Blakeney
Images
Below are a selection of images taken from from the photo album for this walk.  Feel free to browse through these or click on any image to view a larger version in the Gallery.
Click on an image below to view the Image Gallery
 
Return to top  
Maps
Below is the route depicted on the OpenStreetMap, Ordnance Survey Map and Google Map. Links to full page versions are found in the Essential Information
OSM Map
OS Map
Google Map
&#160;
Summary of Document Changes
Last Updated: ...         2016-01-15
Related Walks
Walks around Cley
Walks around Blakeney
Walks along the Norfolk Coast Path
Walks within the area for OS Map  252, Norfolk Coast East
Share This:  
 Facebook
 Twitter
 Google+
 Stumble
 Digg
Coast Walk , Distance:Short , Features:Coastal Erosion , Features:Nature Reserve , News , Norfolk , Norfolk Coast Path , OSmap:252
Email This BlogThis! Share to Twitter Share to Facebook
  2 comments:
David Cotton
1 September 2014 at 16:42
As a matter of interest, were there any breaches in the new flood banking created when they cut off the northern part of the marshes a few years ago?
Reply Delete
Replies
griff chamberlain
1 September 2014 at 19:08
Hello David. I assume you mean the section that follows the new course of the River Glaven - this section appears to have weathered the storm with no sign of breaches (you can see this in this photo - https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/-X1wNXccEgPA/U_tkal0E7iI/AAAAAAAA-rk/RRjWCBtZrz0/s144/DSCF1173.JPG which is looking back towards Cley.) The north side, where the path turns back towards Blakeney and where the new embankment rejoins the original route, is where the works were being undertaken and where the temporary diversion across the marsh has been implemented. By far the worse damage is on the Blakeney side where the embankment was breached in several places. On the Cley side, and part of the original route, is where the breaches have reduced the height of the embankment.
Delete
Reply
Add comment
Load more...
Indexes
Home
Recently Updated Walks
Norfolk Walks
Suffolk Walks
Central England Walks
South-West England Walks
Advanced Search
Alphabetic Index of Griffmonster Walks
Featured Walk
In Search of the Lost City of Dunwich
Once upon a time Dunwich was the largest city in East Anglia. In those days it was a busy port on the mouth of the River Dunwich that brough...
Popular Walks
Norwich Riverside Walk
A simple 2 mile walk alongside the River Wensum through Norwich. This picturesque walk through the centre of Norwich links the Marriott'...
Holkham to Wells Circular Walk
A 9 mile circular walk along the North Norfolk Coast between Holkham and Wells-next-the-sea An alternative to the North Norfolk Coast Path w...
Suffolk Coast Path
An overview of the Suffolk Coast Path, a 60 mile long distance path following the coast of Suffolk A 60 mile long distance footpath from Fel...
Norfolk Coast Path - Cromer to Sheringham
A 6 mile walk along the original route of the Norfolk Coast Path between Cromer and Sheringham Up until December 2014 the official route of ...
A Circular walk to Geldeston Locks from Beccles
An 7 mile circular walk along the Angles Way from Beccles to Geldeston Locks A recommended short walk along the Angles Way to the outstandin...
Norfolk Coast Path Extension
A 21 mile extension has recently been completed to the Norfolk Coast Path taking it through to Sea Palling As part of the English Coast Path...
The Weavers Way
An overview of the The Weavers Way, a 62 mile long distance footpath through Norfolk linking Cromer and Great Yarmouth. The Weavers Way take...
The Peddars Way - Thetford to Knetishall Heath
The trek to the start of the Peddars Way.  Thetford is the closest town to the start to the Peddars Way and there is no public tra...
Lancashire Coastal Way - Lytham St Annes to Fleetwood
A 15 mile way along the Lancashire Lancashire Coastal Way between Lytham St Annes and Fleetwood The route goes through one of the principle ...
Southwold to Covehithe Circular Walk
An 11 mile walk along the Suffolk Coast Path between Southwold and Covehithe A walk along the beach route of the Suffolk Coast Path to the t...
Griffmonster's Facebook
Griffmonsters Great Walks
Other Walk Sites
British Coastline in Film
British Walks
Cambridgeshire Walks
Dr Ruths Coastal Walk
East Suffolk Railway Line Walks
Essex Walks
Explore Norfolk Trails
Griffmonsters Great Rhodes Walks
Helpful Mammals Walk around Britain
Hoofbags Walks
Jordans Walks
Lucy's Walk Around Britain
Malpas Towers SWCP Walk
Melita's Coast of Britain Walk
Mid Anglia Rail Line Walks
Mid Suffolk Footpath
National Trail Website
Natural England Walks
Norfolk Long Distance Paths
Norfolk Trails
Open Walks Website
Peter Catons Essex Coast Walk
Ramblings from Rhodes
Sizewell Circular Walks
South West Coast Path
South West Coastal Pubcrawl
Suffolk Walks
The Coastal Path
The Great Norfolk Walk
Three Rivers Way - Norfolk Broads Trail
Walking in Suffolk (SCC site)
Walks Map for this Blog
ifootpath Walking Guides
Walk Photo Gallery
Loading...
Disclaimer
These walks and directions are only intended as general guidance. If you intend to walk these routes you should have basic map reading skills and take the relevant OS maps for clarity. Adhere to the Countryside Code when walking footpaths and The Highway Code when walking along roads. All details are from a personal perspective and I bear no responsibility for the consequences of following the routes documented.
All images are © of the author and any reproduction, retransmission or republication of all or part of the content is prohibited unless the author has granted explicit consent in writing.
Report a Footpath Issue
Report a Norfolk footpath Issue
Report a Suffolk Footpath Issue
Contact
Follow the Griffmonster
Copyright ©
Griffmonsters Great Walks
Distributed By My Blogger Themes | Blogger Theme By NewBloggerThemes