Beauchamp–Sharp Tragedy - Murder
Murder
Serving as attorney general in Governor Adair's administration, Sharp had become involved in the Old Court – New Court controversy.
The conflict was primarily between debtors who sought relief from their financial burdens after the Panic of 1819 (the New Court, or Relief, faction) and the creditors to whom these obligations were owed (the Old Court, or Anti-Relief, faction).
Sharp , who came from humble beginnings, sided with the New Court.
By 1825, the New Court faction's power was on the decline.
In an attempt to bolster the party's influence, Sharp resigned as attorney general in 1825 to run for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives.
His opponent was Old Court stalwart John J. Crittenden.
During the campaign, Old Court supporters again raised the issue of Sharp's seduction and abandonment of Anna Cooke.
Old Court supporter John Upshaw Waring printed handbills that not only accused Sharp of fathering Cooke's child, but further claiming that Sharp had denied paternity of the child on the grounds that it was a mulatto and the son of a Cooke family slave.
Whether Sharp actually made such a claim has never been determined with certainty.
Despite the allegations, Sharp won the election.
Word of Sharp's alleged claims soon reached Jereboam Beauchamp , reigniting his hatred of Sharp and strengthening his resolve to kill him.
Beauchamp now abandoned the idea of killing Sharp honorably in a duel.
Instead, he decided to assassinate Sharp, casting suspicion on his political enemies.
To add to the political intrigue, Beauchamp plotted to commit the murder on the eve of the General Assembly's opening session.
Beauchamp came to Frankfort on business on November 6.
Unable to find lodging at the local inns, he rented a room in the private residence of Joel Scott, warden of the state penitentiary.
Sometime after midnight, Scott heard a commotion from Beauchamp's room and, upon investigating, found the door latch open and the room unoccupied.
Beauchamp , clad in a disguise, buried a set of his clothes near the Kentucky River, then proceeded to Sharp's house .
Sharp was not at home, but Beauchamp soon found him at a local hotel.
He returned to Sharp's house, concealed himself nearby, and waited for Sharp to return.
He observed Sharp re-enter the house about midnight.
Beauchamp approached the house at approximately two o'clock in the morning on November 7, 1825.
In his Confession, he described the encounter:
I put on my mask, drew my dagger and proceeded to the door ; I knocked three times loud and quick, Colonel Sharp said; "Who's there" - "Covington I replied," quickly Sharp's foot was heard upon the floor.
I saw under the door as he approached without a light.
I drew my mask over my face and immediately Colonel Sharp opened the door.
I advanced into the room and with my left hand I grasped his right wrist .
The violence of the grasp made him spring back and trying to disengage his wrist, he said, "What Covington is this."
I replied John A. Covington.
"I don't know you," said Colonel Sharp , "I know John W. Covington."
Mrs. Sharp appeared at the partition door and then disappeared, seeing her disappear I said in a persuasive tone of voice, "Come to the light Colonel and you will know me," and pulling him by the arm he came readily to the door and still holding his wrist with my left hand I stripped my hat and handkerchief from over my forehead and looked into Sharp's face.
He knew me the more readily I imagine, by my long, bush, curly suit of hair.
He sprang back and exclaimed in a tone of horror and despair, "Great God it is him," and as he said that he fell on his knees.
I let go of his wrist and grasped him by the throat dashing him against the facing of the door and muttered in his face, "die you villain."
As I said that I plunged the dagger to his heart.
—Jereboam Beauchamp,
Confession of Jereboam O. Beauchamp
The wound severed Sharp's aorta, killing him almost instantly.
Sharp's wife Eliza witnessed the entire scene from the top of the stairs in the house, but Beauchamp fled before he could be identified or captured.
Returning to the location where he had buried his regular attire, he changed clothes, tied the accoutrements of his disguise to a rock, and sank them in the Kentucky River.
He then returned to his room at the house of Joel Scott, where he remained until the following morning.