DEC
MAY
Jun
4
2015
2016
2017
3 captures
4 Nov 15 - 4 May 16
Close Help
Spokeo
Sign up
Login
Name
Email
Phone
Address
Jereboam O. Beauchamp
Basic Info
Timeline
Profile
Jereboam O. Beauchamp
Executed Murderer
Male
Born Sep 6, 1802
Hometown United States
Died Jul 7, 1826
Death Place Frankfort, Kentucky
Other Names Beauchamp, Jerebo...
Jereboam Orville Beauchamp was an American lawyer who murdered the Kentucky legislator Solomon P. Sharp, an event known as the Beauchamp–Sharp Tragedy. In 1821, Sharp was accused of fathering the illegitimate stillborn child of a woman named Anna Cooke. Sharp denied paternity of the child, and public opinion favored him. In 1824, Beauchamp married Cooke. During Sharp's 1825 campaign for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives, Cooke's alleged illegitimate child was raised as an issue.…  Read More
related links
Timeline
Learn about the memorable moments in the evolution of Jereboam O. Beauchamp.
CHILDHOOD
1802 Birth Jereboam Beauchamp was born September 6, 1802, in the area that is now Simpson County, Kentucky. … Read More
He was the second son of Thomas and Sally (Smithers) Beauchamp. Both parents were devout Christians. He was named after a paternal uncle, Jereboam O. Beauchamp, a state senator from Washington County, Kentucky.<br /><br /> Beauchamp was educated at Dr. Benjamin Thurston's academy in Barren County, Kentucky until the age of sixteen. Recognizing that his father was not able to sufficiently provide for the family, Beauchamp tried to pay for his education by finding employment as a shopkeeper. While this generated funds for his education, he did not have enough time to pursue his studies. Recommended by Thurston, Beauchamp became preceptor of a school. After saving some money, he returned to Thurston's school as a student, and was later employed by the school as an usher.<br /><br /> By age eighteen, Beauchamp had finished his preparatory studies. After observing the lawyers practicing in Glasgow and Bowling Green, he decided to pursue a career in the legal profession. He particularly admired Solomon Sharp, a young lawyer in his thirties, with whom Beauchamp hoped to study. Read Less
TEENAGE
1820 17 Years Old In 1820, Beauchamp became disenchanted with Sharp when rumors surfaced that he had fathered an illegitimate child with a woman named Anna Cooke. … Read More
Sharp denied paternity of the child, which was stillborn.<br /><br /> Beauchamp left Bowling Green and lived at his father's estate in Simpson County, where he sought to recover from an illness. He learned that Cooke had become a recluse nearby at her mother's estate after her public disgrace. Having heard from a mutual friend about the woman's beauty and accomplishments, he decided to meet Cooke. At first, she rejected all attention, but gradually received Beauchamp under his guise of borrowing books from her library. The two eventually became friends, and, in 1821, began courting. Beauchamp was eighteen years old; Cooke was at least thirty-four.<br /><br /> When he proposed marriage that year, Cooke told Beauchamp she would marry him on the condition that he kill Sharp. Beauchamp consented. Against Cooke's advice, Beauchamp traveled immediately to Frankfort, where Sharp had recently been appointed attorney general by the governor. Read Less
TWENTIES
1823 20 Years Old Beauchamp was admitted to the bar in April 1823.
1824 21 Years Old 5 More Events
Show Less
… 
Jereboam Orville Beauchamp (September 6, 1802 - July 7, 1826) was an American lawyer who murdered the Kentucky legislator Solomon P. Sharp; the crime is known as the Beauchamp–Sharp Tragedy. In 1821, Sharp had been accused of fathering the illegitimate stillborn child of a woman named Anna Cooke. Sharp denied paternity of the child, and public opinion favored him. Read Less
In 1824, Beauchamp married Cooke. During Sharp's 1825 campaign for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives, Cooke's alleged illegitimate child was raised as an issue. … Read More
His political opponents publicized his alleged defense that he could not have been the child's father because the child was mulatto, fathered by a slave. Whether Sharp said this has never been determined with certainty; believing it so, Beauchamp swore to avenge his wife's honor. In the early morning of November 7, 1825, Beauchamp tricked Sharp into answering the door at his home in Frankfort, and fatally stabbed him.<br /><br /> Beauchamp was convicted of the murder and sentenced to hang. The morning of the execution, he and his wife attempted a double suicide by stabbing themselves with a knife she had smuggled into prison. She was successful; he was not. Read Less
Although he had not killed Sharp, he and Anna Cooke married in June 1824. … Read More
Still determined to defend the honor of his wife, Beauchamp devised a ruse to lure Sharp to Bowling Green. He wrote letters to Sharp under various pseudonyms, each asking for his help in some sort of legal matter, and each sent from a different post office. When Sharp failed to respond, Beauchamp decided to go to Frankfort and confront him. Read Less
Beauchamp's plan to move was complicated by a warrant sworn out against him by Ruth Reed. Reed claimed that Beauchamp was the father of her illegitimate child, born on June 10, 1824.
… 
He identified with the New Court, or Relief party, which promoted a legislative agenda favorable to debtors. In opposition was the Old Court, or Anti-Relief party, which worked to secure the rights of creditors to collect debts. Read Less
Sharp had served as the state's attorney general under New Court governors John Adair, whose term lasted until August 1824, and Joseph Desha, who succeeded him in office. The New Court party's power was beginning to wane, however. In 1825, Sharp resigned to run for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives. … Read More
During the campaign, opponents raised the issue of his alleged seduction of Anna Cooke. Old Court partisan John Upshaw Waring had handbills distributed that alleged that Sharp had denied paternity of Cooke's child because it was a mulatto and likely fathered by a Cooke family slave. The story apparently did not affect the election, which Sharp won, defeating John J. Crittenden. Whether Sharp had made the claim is uncertain, but Beauchamp believed he had. He began to prepare to murder him and flee to Missouri. He planned to commit the murder in the early morning of November 7, 1825, when the new legislature would convene its session, in the hopes that suspicion would be cast on Sharp's political enemies. Three weeks prior to that date, Beauchamp sold his property, telling his friends that he was planning to move to Missouri. He hired laborers to help load his wagons two days before the planned murder. Read Less
Several witnesses testified against him. Eliza Sharp testified that the voice of the killer was distinct. A test was devised allowing Mrs. Sharp to hear Beauchamp's voice; she immediately identified it as that of the killer. (Beauchamp claimed he had disguised his voice on the night of the murder and thought Mrs. Sharp would not recognize it.) Patrick H. Darby, an Old Court partisan, claimed that in 1824, he had a chance encounter with the man he now knew as Beauchamp. … Read More
Darby said the man - a stranger to him at the time - had asked for Darby's help in prosecuting an unspecified claim against Sharp. The man then identified himself as the husband of Anna Cooke and said he intended to kill Sharp. Read Less
While imprisoned and awaiting execution, Beauchamp wrote a confession. He accused Patrick Darby of perjury with regard to the alleged 1824 meeting between Darby and Beauchamp. … Read More
Many believed Beauchamp's accusation was meant to curry favor with New Court governor Joseph Desha - who considered Darby a political enemy - and to secure a pardon from him. Read Less
1825 22 Years Old 2 More Events
Show Less
In Frankfort in 1825, Sharp was in the middle of a bitter political battle known as the Old Court-New Court controversy.
Although the warrant was sworn out October 25, 1825, Beauchamp had ignored it on the advice of a friend who said it was harassment. … Read More
Later, Beauchamp claimed that he had arranged for the warrant to give him a reason to be in Frankfort and present for the murder. The historian Fred Johnson says that the incorporation of the warrant into Beauchamp's story was likely done after the fact as a means of damage control - especially considering that fathering an illegitimate child was the reason for his planned murder of Sharp.<br /><br /> Preparing to travel, Beauchamp packed a change of clothes, a black mask, and a knife with poison on the tip, to be used as the murder weapon. Finding all the inns filled when he arrived at Frankfort, he took lodging at the residence of Joel Scott, warden of the state penitentiary. Between nine and ten o'clock that evening, Beauchamp went to Sharp's home. Dressed in a disguise, he carried his usual clothes and buried them along the bank of the Kentucky River for retrieval following the murder. Discovering that Sharp was not home, Beauchamp sought him in the city and found him at a local tavern. He returned to Sharp's house to wait for him, seeing him arrive about midnight. Read Less
Beauchamp arrived in Frankfort on November 15, 1825. … Read More
New Court partisans talked of Sharp's murder as the work of the Old Court party, just as Beauchamp had hoped. One suspect was Waring, who had printed the handbills critical of Sharp. Known as a violent man, he had both political and personal motivation for the crime. He was cleared of suspicion when investigators learned that, at the time of the murder, Waring was in Fayette County recovering from unrelated injuries.<br /><br /> Suspicion moved to Beauchamp, as he was loyal to the Old Court Party, and was known to hate Sharp for his political principles. People knew of Sharp's earlier alleged involvement with Anna Cooke before her marriage to Beauchamp. In addition, Beauchamp was placed in Frankfort the night of the killing, and his host, Joel Scott, said that he had heard Beauchamp leave in the night. After presenting preliminary testimony, Commonwealth's Attorney Charles Bibb asked for additional time to assemble more witnesses. Beauchamp assented to the request. A second delay pushed the hearings back to mid-December. Read Less
1826 23 Years Old 4 More Events
Show Less
Based on the circumstantial evidence, Beauchamp was held for trial at the next term of the circuit court in March 1826. … Read More
Beauchamp's uncle Jereboam assembled a legal team for his nephew that included former U.S. Senator John Pope. The grand jury convened in March and returned an indictment against Beauchamp for Sharp's murder. Giving Beauchamp the time he requested to gather witnesses, the court scheduled a special session in May specifically for Beauchamp's trial. Read Less
Beauchamp's trial began May 8, 1826. … Read More
After a change of venue was denied, Beauchamp pleaded innocent to the charge against him. A jury was empaneled, and testimony began May 10. Eliza Sharp detailed the events of the night of the murder and reiterated that Beauchamp's voice was that of the murderer. John Lowe, a magistrate of Simpson County, testified that he had heard Beauchamp threaten to kill Sharp, and said that on Beauchamp's return from Frankfort, he saw him waving a red flag and heard him tell his wife that he had "gained the victory." Patrick Darby repeated his testimony of the 1824 meeting between him and Beauchamp. Darby said that Beauchamp had told him that Sharp offered him one thousand dollars, a slave girl, and of land if he and his wife Anna would leave him (Sharp) alone. As Sharp had apparently reneged on the promise, Beauchamp told Darby he was going to kill the man. Other witnesses testified that Beauchamp habitually referred to Sharp's friend, John W. Covington, as "John A. Covington", the name used by the murderer to gain entry to Sharp's house. Read Less
When he finished the confession in mid-June 1826, and Beauchamp's uncle, Senator Beauchamp, took it to the state printer for immediate publication. … Read More
An Old Court supporter, the printer refused to publish it.<br /><br /> Anna Beauchamp joined her husband in his cell. During their incarceration, they tried to bribe a guard into allowing them to escape. When that failed, they tried to pass a letter to Senator Beauchamp asking him for help in an escape, an attempt which likewise failed. Both the senator and the younger Beauchamp asked for a pardon from Governor Desha, but to no avail. Read Less
Beauchamp's final request to Desha for a stay of execution was rejected July 5, 1826. … Read More
With the last hope exhausted, the couple attempted a double suicide by drinking a vial of laudanum which Anna had smuggled into the cell. Both survived the attempt. The following morning, Jereboam and Anna were put on suicide watch and threatened with separation.<br /><br /> The night before the execution, Anna took a second dose of laudanum but was unable to keep it down. On July 7, 1826, the morning of the scheduled execution, Anna asked the guard to give her privacy to dress. Once the guard left, Anna revealed to Beauchamp that she had smuggled in a knife, and she and her husband stabbed themselves. Anna was taken to a nearby house to be treated by doctors.<br /><br /> Too weak to stand or walk, Beauchamp was loaded onto a cart to be conveyed to the gallows. He begged to see Anna, but the guards told him she was not seriously injured. The guards finally allowed him to see his wife. When they got to her, Beauchamp was angered that they had underplayed her critical condition. He stayed with her until he could no longer feel her pulse; then the guards took him to the gallows to be hanged before he died of his stab wounds. Read Less
Beauchamp was rushed to the gallows before he could bleed to death and was hanged on July 7, 1826. … Read More
The bodies of Jereboam and Anna Beauchamp were arranged in an embrace and buried in a single coffin, as they had requested. The Beauchamp–Sharp Tragedy inspired fictional works such as Edgar Allan Poe's unfinished Politian and Robert Penn Warren's World Enough and Time. Read Less
Original Authors of this text are noted on http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jereboam_O._Beauchamp .
Text is made available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License .
Navigation
Reverse Phone Lookup
Email Lookup
People Search
Address Lookup
Blog
Celebrating Ten Years!
Spokeo Helps Reconnect Foster Children to Family Mem...
Spokeo Celebrates 10th Anniversary with #SpokeoTurns...
Spokeo Announces Spring 2016 Scholarship Winner
Spokeo Achieves Record Growth in 2015
Popular People
Lesley Gore
Taylor Kinney
Steve Montador
David Carr
Emile Hirsch
About
Careers
News
Blog
Privacy
Terms
Directory
Affiliates
Community
Contact
More
Copyright © 2006-2016 Spokeo, Inc.