Review of Park Grill Chicago
11 North Michigan Ave, Chicago, IL 60602 (Downtown / The Loop)
3125217275
2
Update
Park Grill Chicago is not available for your requested time. Choose another time, or search restaurants with availability.
Cuisines: American , Bar, Gluten Free
More restaurant details
Restaurant details
Good for: Business meetings, Local cuisine, Families with children, Large groups
Dining options: Late Night, Brunch, Dinner, Lunch, Full Bar, Outdoor Seating, Reservations, Seating, Serves Alcohol, Waitstaff, Wheelchair Accessible
Dining style: Casual Elegant
Cross street: Washington
Transit: Madison/Wabash Brown Line, Lake Red Line
Description: Nestled under “The Bean” in Millennium Park and along Michigan Avenue you’ll find Park Grill, an American Bistro serving cuisine with Chicago flair, breathtaking views, and unique happenings throughout the year. In the warm months our Plaza opens, where diners can enjoy live music and the open air in this al fresco eatery. During winter the Millennium Park ice rink comes to life in front of Park Grill, which allows guests to watch skaters while enjoying their meal. Let Park Grill host your next gathering in the heart of the city. We have unique accommodations for groups as intimate as 10 or as large as 300. Our cozy indoor areas and tented outdoor space allow for a customizable event experience that’s sure to be unforgettable.
Sponsored links *
“Touristy, but great!”
Reviewed June 3, 2014
Of course a restaurant located directly under Cloud Gate (The Bean!) is going to be a tourist hot spot. I was hesitant to go because of this. I was expecting an overcrowded and overpriced experience at Park Grill, but ultimately choose it for dinner with friends who were coming in on the Metra to Millennium Station. It was conveniently located and accepted reservations. We had a reservation through Open Table and were seated immediately in a great booth near a window. The meal service was a bit slow, but the food was great. Everyone in my party was happy with their meals (we had a few of the salad options, a Park Grill burger, truffle fries, and calamari).
Though we ate inside, I was admiring the patio. It would be perfect in the spring and early summer! I can image that they get extremely busy, so I recommend making a reservation. If you're staying on Michigan Avenue, this location really can't be beat. Stop here for dinner after visiting the Art Institute, then go upstairs and see the Bean!
Visited May 2014
“Very tasty & convenient”
Reviewed May 31, 2014
Great location under the Bean. Fast service, good food & cocktails. They are well known for Sunday Brunch and that was when we planned our visit. My boyfriend and I enjoyed it. He had the steak & eggs and I had a burger. Great for couples or families. Saw several families dining there as well. I would suggest making recommendations. There is an outdoor patio region as well which does not take reservations so it's great for people who just want to pop in. Superb location. We checked in early and were able to walk around the Bean and get a bunch of pictures. Great time.
Visited May 2014