APR
JUN
Jul
12
2015
2016
2017
66 captures
12 Oct 10 - 12 Jun 16
Close Help
Chicago
Attractions
Map
Tours
Hotels
Facts
Buildings
Posters
Pictures
History
A View On Cities > Chicago > Chicago Attractions > Cloud Gate
Loading...
Sears Tower
Magnificent Mile
Navy Pier
Grant Park
Millennium Park
> Cloud Gate
Shedd Aquarium
Art Institute of Chicago
Buckingham Fountain
Water Tower
Union Station
Lincoln Park Zoo
John Hancock Center
Field Museum
Wrigley Building
Chicago River
Tribune Tower
Museum of Science and Industry
Chicago Theatre
Aqua
Michigan Avenue Bridge
Merchandise Mart
Lincoln Park
Marina City
Riverwalk
Crown Fountain
City Hall
Prairie Avenue
Lake Point Tower
Oak Street Beach
Dearborn Street Station
City Hall
Caldwell Lily Pool Gardens
860-880 Lake Shore Drive Apartments
More Chicago Attractions...
Cloud Gate
The Bean
Info
Location/Map
Nearby sights
Nearby hotels
Photos
Posters
Rating
284 votes
1
2
3
4
5
284 votes
Cloud Gate is a large public sculpture which was first unveiled at the opening of Millennium Park in 2004. It soon became one of the city's most photographed attractions, and is now one a famous symbol of Chicago.
Cloud Gate
The Cloud Gate further cemented Chicago's reputation of a city at the forefront of public art and follows in the footsteps of earlier well-known public installations such as Alexander Calder's Flamingo at Federal Center , Picasso's untitled sculpture at the City Hall and Jean Dubuffet's Monument with Standing Beast at the James R. Thompson Center .
The Name
Even before it was given an official title, Chicagoans were quick to dub the reflective steel sculpture 'the Bean' after its peculiar shape and the name stuck. The official name however is Cloud Gate as it represents a gate to the city it reflects.
Design
Cloud Gate
Cloud Gate was the first public sculpture of Indian-born and London-based artist Anish Kapoor. His work was selected out of two proposals that were submitted in 1999 for a showpiece sculpture in the new, modern Millennium Park , which was scheduled to open in 2000.
Kapoor designed a stainless steel construction consisting of 168 plates, each 1 cm (0.4 inch) thick and seamlessly welded together. The structure weighs 100 tons and measures 10 meters high and 20 meters wide (33 x 66 ft). People can walk through the 3.7 meter high central arch, where they can look up to the large 'dent' and see numerous distorted reflections of themselves.
Unveiling
When the new Millennium Park was officially inaugurated in 2004 after a four year delay, the city was eager to show the sculpture to the public, as it had spent the hefty sum of 23 million dollars on what was to become one of the highlights of the park.
Reflection of the
Michigan Avenue Skyline
Unfortunately the assembly of the sculpture was well behind schedule and Kapoor was reluctant to unveil the unfinished artwork to the public. And not without reason; the structure was still unpolished and the seams were visible.
As expected, many Chicagoans were highly critical and dismissed the unfinished 'Bean' as a piece of metal. After the inauguration of the park, the structure was put back under wraps. Not until it was completely finished in May, 2006 became its almost magical appeal visible.
Now seamless and polished, the Cloud Gate reflects and distorts the skyline of Michigan Avenue, the sky, and the people nearby, who always seem to have the urge to touch the sculpture's silvery surface. Cloud Gate instantly became an icon of Chicago, and an attraction that every visitor to the city wants to see.
Next: Shedd Aquarium
Subway
Madison/Wabash (purple, brown, green, orange, pink)
Location
Millennium Park
2153
chicago
x
Press &ltESC> to close
© 2016 www.aviewoncities.com