SEP
JUN
Jul
12
2015
2016
2017
4 captures
29 Jan 15 - 12 Jun 16
Close Help
Sed Bona
Everyday Inspiration From A Chicago Photographer
Home
About
Press
Contact
Disclosure Policy
Style
Spring
Summer
Autumn
Winter
Recipes
Life
Chicago
Travel
Pugs
Shop
Summer Style
Wardrobe Classics
Ashley /
January 23, 2015
Chicago’s Cloud Gate
Chicago is a city full of surprises.
Often people visit without knowing what to expect and yet slowly and surely find themselves falling for the charms of the Windy City. As a native Chicagoan, I’m not surprised — our city is such a diverse and unique place that it really does have something for everyone.
I’m constantly discovering new and cool spaces in this city and am forever rewarded with novelty. Chicago never stops amazing me!
One of my favorite (and public!) spots here is the famous  Cloud Gate (aka “The Bean”). In its short life (it was constructed between 2004 and 2006) it has quickly become an well-known icon and symbol for the city.
Early one morning, Soraya and I had the pleasure of having “The Bean” to ourselves and the experience was breath-taking!
Sometimes winter adventures really can be the most profound.
The design of the Cloud Gate was inspired by the way mercury beads up on a flat surface. You can’t see any seams in the stainless steel reflection and the effect is MESMORIZING!
The skewed reflections give such a fresh and new perspective of the city I know so well. It just goes to show that even adventures in your hometown can lead to some very interesting experiences.
Being underneath the Gate is my favorite part!
#Selfie (see me? Twice?)
I couldn’t believe we had The Bean ALL TO OURSELVES! Dedication and a willingness to wake-up long before a sane hour paid off big time that morning.
The early bird gets the worm (or in this case The Bean)!
I always feel so small next to this sculpture!
The reflection of the water on the damp ground made the most beautiful colors and patterns in the bean. It was magical watching my own reflection pass through the world reflected. I felt like Alice in some glowing, enchanted Wonderland.
Vest – Zara Quilted in Navy (VERY SIMILAR here)
Sweater – Forever 21 ‘Waffle Knit’ Crew Neck in Cream ( here )
Jeans – J Brand ‘835’ in Gray (similar here)
Boots – Hunter Adjustable in Navy ( here )
Bag – Zara City in Navy (new season version in Black Croc here)
Many thanks to Soraya for snapping the photos of me at the Gate and for such a memorable winter adventure while she was visiting from the UAE!
Share this:
Click to email this to a friend (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)
Like this:
Like Loading...
Follow:
Discover More Inspiration:
14 Spring Wardrobe Essentials
Urban Exploration
Sullivan’s Steakhouse
An Ode to Oysters & Cheesecake
Previous Post Fred’s at Barneys
Next Post Vegetarian Black Bean Soup
Pam
I would love to visit Chicago one day. I’ve heard it’s a beautiful city. Thanks for sharing your pics. xo Pam
http://www.thegirlfrompanama.com
Gigi Baith
Aaaaaah! These are magnificent shots doll! xoxo
Best,
SongsinthekeyofG.blogspot.com
Bella Pummarola
Chicago must be such an amazing city! I’d love to visit it!
Bella Pummarola
Bluebird the Truebird
LOVE the bean! AND love that cute little signature.
Lisa
Great photos!!!  The bean is such a cool thing to see, how lucky you had it to yourself!
Pingback: The Chicago Theatre - Sed Bona ()
Pingback: An Upside Down Tea Party - Sed Bona ()
Sed Bona, a snippet of the Latin phrase “Pauca Sed Bona“, means “quality over quantity”. It means that having more isn’t always best. It means empowering yourself to do fewer but better, more beautiful, and more fruitful things
Instagram
19   479
37   564
19   439
32   505
Follow on Instagram
Subscribe to Blog via Email
Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Email Address
Where to next?
Breaking the Rules
Sofitel’s 2015 Bûche …
Brunch at Latinicity
Obsessing Over… Lush Gourmet …
Lunch at Travelle Kitchen + …
Chicago Eats || The Allis …
Hibernating at Ralph Lauren
Sage & Gruyère Popovers
Destiny
Low-Carb Rosemary Parmesan Crisps
A Classic American Lunch …
River Architecture
The T&J Designs …
Matcha Green Tea Pound …
2015 Gift Guide || My Edit
© Sed Bona LLC 2016
WordPress themes by pipdig
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.
%d bloggers like this:
Close Me
Looking for Something?
Search:
Post Categories:
Chicago
Life
Recipes
Style
Travel