MAR
APR
MAY
14
2015
2016
2017
21 captures
21 Apr 14 - 30 May 16
Close Help
Famous Scientists
Home
List of Scientists
Blog
William Bayliss
An English physiologist, William Bayliss was the co-discoverer of the peptide hormone called secretin which he and Ernest Starling jointly researched about. Together with Starling, Bayliss also discovered the peristaltic or the movements and contractions inside the digestive tract which moves food from one place to another. Apart from these discoveries, Bayliss is also a notable name for research in the fields of physical chemistry, biochemistry, and physiology.
Early Life and Educational Background
William Bayliss was born William MaddockBayliss on the second of May in 1860 in Butcroft, Wednesbury. His parents were Jane Maddock and Moses Bayliss who was a manufacturer of screw bolts. He had no siblings and was named after a paternal uncle who happened to be the man who founded the ironworks in Wolverhampton’s Cable Street. Later in his life, William joined this firm along with one other person and the firm was then known as Bayliss, Jones and Bayliss.
Advertisements
Growing up in Wolverhampton, he got his initial education in Mowbray House School. Later on, he became the apprentice of a doctor in the Wolverhampton Hospital—this was done to hopefully rouse his interest in medicine which somehow succeeded in the long run despite a slight change of course. He was not able to complete his apprenticeship and he took a different road when he went to the University College London in 1881. Four years later, he attended Wadham College in Oxford. During his time there, he worked on getting his degree in the School of Natural Science or Physiology. Back then, this was a blooming field which a lot of scientific minds began to take interest in. After finishing his degree, he took a teaching post in the University College London from 1888-1912. It was when he was working there that he made his grand discovery.
Career and Scientific Endeavors
Ernest Henry Starling, another notable name which almost always pops up along with Bayliss’s, was also a physiologist who worked at the University College London. Together, he and Bayliss discovered the occurence when food touches the small intestine. These physiologists were able to determine how secretin, a chemical substance—more specificallya hormone–is secreted. This substance is then carried by the blood to the pancreas. There it would stimulate pancreatic juice secretion. Pancreatic juices are the most important ones when it comes to digestion, and this hormone is what triggers the pancreatic juice secretion.
Secretin, the substance they discovered, was the very first hormone identified. Bayliss and Starling coined the term “hormone” from the Greek phrase “I arouse” or “I excite” because of its effects on another organ. Because of their breakthrough, a whole new field of medical and scientific research was opened. So much was the importance of their discovery that the “Bayliss Clubs” in America are named after William Bayliss. These clubs were formed to help raise more awareness on life in general and how chemistry is also a factor at play in it.
Despite the positive contributions they had, there was also some controversy surrounding their work. Their tandem worked on animal experiments which led to the 1903 Brown Dog Affair. Stephen Coleridge who was then the Secretary of the National Anti-Vivesection Society addressed the Society that a certain brown dog was vivesected at the University College London and the procedure was done by Bayliss. As a counter move, Bayliss sued Coleridge and he won. After this incident, he donated no less than £2,000 to the college for the damages the incident incurred, especially on the physiological research department. After then, Bayliss distanced from the issue and even wrote several articles which were about the humane and proper treatment of animals. Come 1912, Bayliss was appointed as the Professor of General Physiology at University College London.
Bayliss had a very productive scientific career and his tandem discovery with Ernest Starling wasn’t the end of his scientific contributions which are remembered to this day. He also engaged himself in the study about saline injections which helped counter shock which patients tend to experience after surgery. Because of the findings in this work of his, he eventually proposed using gum-saline injections. These injections had been used for shock caused by major wounds and had saved many lives during the First World War.
Three years after he was appointed as the Professor of General Physiology, Bayliss’s classic publication called the “Principles of General Physiology” was made public. During his lifetime, his famous publication had four editions. There came a point when he became too ill to make the revisions himself and since each chapter required professional attention, no other person was quite able to make a revision as detailed as the previous ones were for the lack of thorough knowledge in the fields that Bayliss himself opened.
Two years before he died, Sir William Bayliss was knighted after which he lived in Hampstead and continued working as the director of their family business which his uncle started.
Personal Life and Later Years
His collaborations with Ernest Starling weren’t all about science. In fact, they left a different kind of legacy when it came to their personal lives. Bayliss’s children had been born by Starling’s sister named Gertrude. Together, they had a daughter and three sons. Leonard Ernest Bayliss followed the footsteps of his father and also became a physiologist and studied under the wing of Starling at the University College London.
Bayliss and his wife took part in the social setup of the people around them. This was why they had mutual interests and spent efforts on improving the working conditions of those in Cable Street where the family business was located. The people from the area knew of the couple’s hospitality and Bayliss kept an interesting scientific aura inside their home all the time. According to varied accounts, Bayliss was a gentle and honest man who was very approachable. It was also said that he was a man who always esteemed other people more highly than he did himself.
In 1924, Bayliss died in London. Several years later in 1979, the Bayliss and Starling Society was established and the main purpose of the society was focused on central and autonomic peptide functions.
Advertisements
More from FamousScientists.org:
The Brown Dog Riots
William Harvey
Alexander Fleming
Irene Joliot-Curie
Search Famous Scientists
Scientist of the Week
André Marie Ampère : Founded electromagnetic theory
Recent Scientists of the Week
Jane Goodall : Discoveries in chimpanzee behavior
James Hutton : Founded modern geology
Harold Urey : Deuterium and the building blocks of life
Andreas Vesalius : Founded modern anatomy
Niels Bohr : Quantum mechanics & the atom
Barbara McClintock : Jumping genes & crossing chromosomes
Francis Bacon : The Scientific Method
Anaximander : An ancient scientific revolution
Heinrich Hertz : Discovered radio waves and photoelectric effect
Charles Darwin : Evolution by natural selection
Robert Boyle : The birth of chemistry
Srinivasa Ramanujan : The purest mathematics
Ernest Lawrence : Invented the cyclotron; founder of big science
Rudolf Virchow : Discovered diseases strike by attacking cells
Irene Joliot-Curie : The first artificial radioactive elements
Hans Christian Oersted : Discovered electromagnetism
Jack Horner : New horizons in dinosaur research
Ronald Fisher : Statistician; and greatest biologist since Darwin?
Fibonacci : Rebirth of Western mathematics
Joseph Henry : Master of electromagnetic science
Antoine Lavoisier : Revolutionized chemistry
Emmy Noether : Unlocked a secret of the universe
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek : The father of microbiology
Ernest Rutherford : Discovered the atomic nucleus and proton
J. J. Thomson : Discovered the electron
Alexander Fleming : Discovered penicillin and more
Jacques Cousteau : Marine pioneer, inventor, Oscar winner
Willard Gibbs : Father of chemical thermodynamics
Sergei Winogradsky : Discovered chemosynthetic life forms
Inge Lehmann : Discovered our planet's solid inner core
Aage Bohr : Explained the structure of the atomic nucleus
Alfred Wegener : Discovered continental drift
Chen-Ning Yang : Thought the unthinkable; broke parity
Johannes Kepler : Solved the mystery of the planets
William Harvey : Explained blood circulation for the first time
Glenn Seaborg : Record breaking discoverer of elements
Isaac Newton : Gravity, light, the laws of motion and calculus
Carolus Linnaeus : Organized our view of the natural world
Thales of Miletus : The first scientist in history
Ada Lovelace : Mother of computing science
Amedeo Avogadro : A founder of atomic-molecular chemistry
Pierre de Fermat : So much more than his famous last theorem
Henry Moseley : Discovered the periodic table's true basis
Galen : Shaped medicine for 1500 years
Nicolaus Copernicus : Started the scientific revolution
Aristotle : Genius and enduring errors
Marguerite Perey : Discoverer of francium
Luis Alvarez : Dinosaur death by meteorite impact
Michael Faraday : Experimental genius; electromagnetic pioneer
David Hilbert : Driving force in 20th century mathematics
Santiago Ramón y Cajal : Father of modern neuroscience
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar : Black hole formation
John Dalton : Dalton's Atomic Theory is the basis of chemistry
Robert Hooke : Discovered cells; revealed the microscopic world
Robert Bunsen : Discoverer of elements & antidote to arsenic
Benjamin Franklin : Proved electricity is a force of nature
Alexander Graham Bell : Inventor of the telephone
Marie Curie : Discoverer of elements. Radioactivity pioneer
Galileo Galilei : The father of modern science
Alfred R. Wallace : Discoverer of evolution by natural selection
Aristarchus : First to say that Earth orbits the sun
Jane Marcet : Inspirational chemistry
Pythagoras : The first rigorous mathematics
Alessandro Volta : Electrical pioneer. Inventor of the battery
James Watt : Father of the industrial revolution
Gene Shoemaker : First astro-geologist. Comet discoverer
Brahmagupta : Discoverer of zero
Archimedes : The greatest scientist ever?
Eratosthenes : Accurately calculated Earth's size 2500yr ago
Stephanie Kwolek : Inventor of kevlar
James Clerk Maxwell : Unified electricity, magnetism & light
Albert Einstein : Theories of relativity and E = mc2
Gregor Mendel : Founder of the science of genetics
Dmitri Mendeleev : The periodic table discovered in a dream
James Chadwick : Discoverer of the neutron
Famous Scientists
Aage Bohr
Ada Lovelace
Agnes Arber
Ahmed Zewail
Al-Battani
Alan Turing
Albert Abraham Michelson
Albert Einstein
Alberto Santos-Dumont
Albrecht von Haller
Aldo Leopold
Alessandro Volta
Alexander Bain
Alexander Fleming
Alexander Graham Bell
Alexander Von Humboldt
Alfred Binet
Alfred Kinsey
Alfred Nobel
Alfred Russel Wallace
Alfred Wegener
Amedeo Avogadro
Anaximander
Anders Celsius
André Marie Ampère
Andreas Vesalius
Angel Alcala
Antoine Lavoisier
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek
Antonio Meucci
Archimedes
Aristarchus
Aristotle
Arnold Sommerfeld
Arthur Eddington
Avicenna
B. F. Skinner
Barbara McClintock
Beatrix Potter
Benjamin Franklin
Benjamin Thompson
Bernardo Houssay
Bill Nye
Blaise Pascal
Brahmagupta
Brian Cox
C. V. Raman
Carl Bosch
Carl Friedrich Gauss
Carl Sagan
Carolus Linnaeus
Charles Babbage
Charles Darwin
Charles Lyell
Charles Sherrington
Charles-Augustin de Coulomb
Chen-Ning Yang
Christiaan Huygens
Christiane Nusslein-Volhard
Clarence Birdseye
Claude Bernard
Claude Levi-Strauss
Clyde Tombaugh
Daniel Bernoulli
David Bohm
David Hilbert
Dian Fossey
Dmitri Mendeleev
Dorothy Hodgkin
E. O. Wilson
Edmund Halley
Edward Jenner
Edward Teller
Edwin Herbert Land
Edwin Hubble
Elizabeth Blackwell
Emil Fischer
Emil Kraepelin
Emile Berliner
Emmy Noether
Empedocles
Enrico Fermi
Eratosthenes
Ernest Lawrence
Ernest Rutherford
Ernst Haeckel
Ernst Mach
Ernst Mayr
Ernst Werner von Siemens
Erwin Chargaff
Erwin Schrodinger
Euclid
Evangelista Torricelli
Fibonacci
Francesco Redi
Francis Bacon
Francis Crick
Francis Galton
Franz Boas
Frederick Gowland Hopkins
Frederick Sanger
Frederick Soddy
Friedrich August Kekulé
Friedrich Wöhler
Fritz Haber
Galen
Galileo Galilei
Gene Shoemaker
Georg Ohm
George Gaylord Simpson
George Washington Carver
Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon
Gertrude Elion
Gerty Theresa Cori
Glenn Seaborg
Gottfried Leibniz
Gottlieb Daimler
Grace Murray Hopper
Gregor Mendel
Guglielmo Marconi
Gustav Kirchoff
Gustav Ludwig Hertz
Hans Christian Oersted
Hans Selye
Harold Urey
Harriet Quimby
Hedy Lamarr
Heinrich Hertz
Henri Becquerel
Henrietta Swan Leavitt
Henry Bessemer
Henry Cavendish
Henry Ford
Henry Moseley
Hermann Rorschach
Hermann von Helmholtz
Homi Jehangir Bhabha
Humphry Davy
Ibn Rushd
Inge Lehmann
Irene Joliot-Curie
Isaac Newton
Ivan Pavlov
J. J. Thomson
J. Robert Oppenheimer
J. Willard Gibbs
Jack Horner
Jacques Cousteau
Jagadish Chandra Bose
James Chadwick
James Clerk Maxwell
James Dwight Dana
James Hutton
James Prescott Joule
James Watson
James Watt
Jan Baptist von Helmont
Jane Goodall
Jane Marcet
Jean Piaget
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
Jocelyn Bell Burnell
Johannes Kepler
John Dalton
John Locke
John Logie Baird
John Napier
John Needham
John Ray
John von Neumann
Jonas Salk
Joseph Banks
Joseph Henry
Joseph Lister
Joseph Priestley
Justus von Liebig
Karl Landsteiner
Katharine Burr Blodgett
Kip S. Thorne
Konrad Lorenz
Lee De Forest
Leonardo da Vinci
Leonhard Euler
Lester R. Brown
Linus Pauling
Lise Meitner
Louis Agassiz
Louis de Broglie
Louis Pasteur
Lucretius
Ludwig Boltzmann
Luigi Galvani
Luis Alvarez
Luther Burbank
Lynn Margulis
Mae Carol Jemison
Marcello Malpighi
Marguerite Perey
Maria Gaetana Agnesi
Maria Goeppert-Mayer
Maria Mitchell
Marie Curie
Mario Molina
Mary Anning
Max Born
Max Planck
Max von Laue
Michael E. Brown
Michael Faraday
Michio Kaku
Mohammad Abdus Salam
Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi
Murray Gell-Mann
Nicolaus Copernicus
Niels Bohr
Nikola Tesla
Noam Chomsky
Omar Khayyam
Otto Hahn
Paul Dirac
Paul Ehrlich
Pierre Curie
Pierre de Fermat
Pierre-Simon Laplace
Prafulla Chandra Ray
Pythagoras
Rachel Carson
René Descartes
Richard Feynman
Rita Levi-Montalcini
Robert Bosch
Robert Boyle
Robert Brown
Robert Bunsen
Robert Goddard
Robert Hooke
Robert Koch
Ronald Fisher
Ronald Ross
Rosalind Franklin
Rudolf Christian Karl Diesel
Rudolf Virchow
Salim Ali
Sally Ride
Santiago Ramón y Cajal
Sergei Winogradsky
Sigmund Freud
Srinivasa Ramanujan
Stephanie Kwolek
Stephen Hawking
Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar
Svante Arrhenius
Thabit ibn Qurra
Thales
Theodor Schwann
Theodosius Dobzhansky
Thomas Alva Edison
Thomas Hunt Morgan
Thomas Kuhn
Thomas Newcomen
Thomas Willis
Tim Noakes
Timothy John Berners-Lee
Tycho Brahe
Virginia Apgar
Vladimir Vernadsky
Werner Heisenberg
Wernher Von Braun
Wilbur and Orville Wright
Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen
Wilhelm Röntgen
Wilhelm Wundt
William Buckland
William Harvey
William Herschel
William Hopkins
William Ramsay
William Smith
William Thomson
Wolfgang Ernst Pauli
Zora Neale Hurston
Recent Posts
11 great scientists who were part-timers
How Heinrich Hertz Discovered Radio Waves
Evolution Theories Before Darwin
Brilliant Biology Quotes
The Brown Dog Riots
12 scientists and their brilliant inventions
Top 10 Scientists’ Beards
77 Great Scientists who lived into their nineties
23 Great Scientists who lived for 100 years or more
Two centuries of right and left handed molecules
7 Scientists whose ideas were rejected during their lifetimes
Magnificent Mathematics Quotes
7 Scientists Who Died Violently
Science Myth or Truth? Can you tell?
Return to top of page
Famous Scientists - Privacy - Contact - Content & Imagery © 2016
This website uses cookies to improve your experience. We'll assume you're ok with this, but you can opt-out if you wish. Accept Read More