Mar
APR
May
12
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
12 Apr 16 - 12 Apr 16
Close Help
Log in | Register
Home About Us Create a Tribute View Tributes Famous Pets News Forum Contact Us
Home
About Us
Create Tribute
View Tributes
Famous Pets
News/Features
Email Newsletter
Forum
Links
Contact Us
Help/FAQs
Search this site:
LOST & FOND
When your pet dies
Ways to remember
Pet crematoria
Pet charities
Pet info
Pet insurance
The story of the little brown dog
Posted on January 14th, 2014 by Lost and Fond
By Bill Pritchard
It may be thought that campaigns against animal vivisection are a product of our modern world, that our increased concern with animal welfare is a relatively new concept only surfacing since the 1960s.
However, in the early 1900s there was a case that divided the United Kingdom. Known as The Brown Dog Affair, this controversy about vivisection raged in Edwardian England from 1903 until 1910. It included the infiltration of University of London medical lectures by two Swedish anti-vivisection campaigners, a four day libel trial, pitched battles in the street and a nightly police guard of a statue.
Dr Bayliss and the experiments on the little brown dog
It all started in February 1903 when it was claimed that William Bayliss of the Department of Physiology at University College London performed an illegal dissection in front of an audience of 60 medical students on a brown terrier dog. Bayliss and his team claimed the dog was anaesthetised; two Swedish women who attended the lecture said it was bound and gagged but conscious and struggling.
The dog had first been operated on in front of students a couple of months earlier, and then kept in a cage until the lecture in February 1903 where it was opened up again and then subjected to more vivisection and half an hour of electric shocks before finally being killed by a research student.
The procedure was condemned as unlawful by the National Anti-Vivisection Society, because by subjecting the dog to more than one experiment the 1876 Cruelty to Animals Act had been breached. If the dog had not been correctly anaesthetised, as the women claimed, the law had been broken again.
The National Anti-Vivisection Society takes a stand
The women had taken their story and notes they had made to The Hon. Stephen Coleridge, Honorary Secretary of the National Anti-Vivisection Society. By profession he was a barrister and also the great-grandson of the poet, Samuel Taylor Coleridge.
Coleridge made a public statement about the dog's vivisection and death at an anti-vivisection meeting in St James' Hall, London, which was reported in the press and led to Dr Bayliss sueing for libel.
After a four-day trial ended in Dr Bayliss's favour he was awarded £2,000 damages. But public opinion was split. The Daily News began a fund to pay the damages and costs of the trial. Then anti-vivisectionists decided to commission a statue of the dog as a permanent memorial which was unveiled in Battersea in 1906.
Controversy surrounds the dog statue inscription
The life size bronze dog sat on top of a drinking fountain, but medical students were angered by a plaque on the fountain which read:
‘In Memory of the Brown Terrier Dog done to Death in the Laboratories of University College in February 1903, after having endured Vivisection extending over more than two months and having been handed from one Vivisector to another till Death came to his Release. Also in Memory of the 232 dogs vivisected at the same place during the year 1902. Men and Women of England, how long shall these things be?’
After about a year, medical students and their supporters - who became known as anti-doggers - began attempting to destroy the statue and it was often daubed with paint.
Local residents stepped in to defend the statue and fights regularly broke out resulting in the need for a police guard around the statue.
A series of battles called the Brown Dog Riots took place; one of the biggest was on December 10, 1907 when about 1,000 anti-doggers marched through London clashing with suffragettes, trade unionists and 400 police officers.
Eventually, in March 2010, the local council removed the monument in the early hours of one morning and despite a 20,000-strong petition calling for its return it was presumed to have been broken up and melted down.
The little brown dog returns to Battersea
But the little brown dog was not forgotten. In December 1985, a new memorial to the brown dog was unveiled in Battersea Park by actress Geraldine James. It was commissioned by the National Anti-Vivisection Society and the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection
The new dog statue, by sculptor Nicola Hicks, sits on a plinth and is based on her own pet terrier dog.
It repeats the original inscription, but adds:
This monument replaces the original memorial of the brown dog erected by public subscription in Latchmere Recreation Ground, Battersea in 1906. The sufferings of the brown dog at the hands of the vivisectors generated much protest and mass demonstrations. It represented the revulsion of the people of London to vivisection and animal experimentation. This new monument is dedicated to the continuing struggle to end these practices. After much controversy the former monument was removed in the early hours of 10 March 1910. This was the result of a decision taken by the then Battersea Metropolitan Borough Council, the previous council having supported the erection of the memorial.
Animal experimentation is one of the greatest moral issues of our time and should have no place in a civilized society. In 1903, 19,084 animals suffered and died in British laboratories. During 1984, 3,497,355 animals were burned, blinded, irradiated, poisoned and subjected to countless other horrifyingly cruel experiments in Great Britain.
The National Anti-Vivisection Society was founded in 1875 by Frances Power Cobbe, a humanitarian who published many leaflets and articles opposing animal experiments and gathered many notable people of the day to support the cause, including Queen Victoria.
You can read more about the Brown Dog Affair on Wikipedia. and on the National Anti-Vivisection Society website.
Related content:
Lost and Fond tribute page for the little brown dog
All latest Lost and Fond news and features
Share this:
© 2010-2012, Lost & Fond.     About Us | Terms & Conditions | Privacy and Cookies | Contact Us