Mar
APR
May
13
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
13 Apr 16 - 13 Apr 16
Close Help
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z #
Brown Dog affair
The Browndog affair ( en: Brown Dog affair) was a political controversy about intervention on live animals for scientific purposes ( vivisection ) in Edwardian England ( 1902-1910 ).
London Seminars for medicine were infiltrated by a group of Swedish Antivivisektionistinnen, and there were several street battles between medical students and the police.
The Royal Courts of Justice ( the Royal Court ) negotiated because of several libel suits and a Royal Commission ( a royal commission of inquiry ) was convened to review the legality of the use of animals in experiments.
The affair polarized both among academics as well as the rest of the English population.
It was triggered in February 1903 by the accusation, William Bayliss had made an illegal dissection of a brown Terriers at the Department of Physiology at University College London - by its own account under proper anesthesia, according to the Antivivisektionisten fully conscious.
The Anti- Vivisection Society condemned the action as a cruel injustice.
Byliss, whose research contributed to dogs a central contribution to the understanding of hormones led to court successfully for libel.
The animal rights activists set up in response to the verdict in 1906 a bronze statue of the dog in Battersea.
The medical school, especially the students, felt provoked by the inscription:
"Men and women of England, how long will these things last? "
The statue was repeatedly vandalized and was then temporarily guarded around the clock to prevent actions of the so-called anti - doggers.
On December 10, 1907 of which 1000 marched through central London and came under violent escalation with suffragettes, trade unionists, and about 400 police officers in Trafalgar Square together.
It also came in the aftermath repeatedly to similar street battles (about: Unrest of the brown dog ) as the Brown Dog Riots were known.
Under the pressure of the controversy, the statue was removed in 1910 by the District secret of which is required by support of a petition with 20,000 signatories.
A new statue was erected in 1985 at Battersea Park .
" The science of life is a blindingly bright hall that can only be accessed by you walk through a long, ugly kitchen."
4.1 unrest
Political background
Walter Gratzer, professor of biochemistry at King's College, tells of a strong opposition to Vivisektionspraxis in England during the reign of Queen Victoria, both in the House of Commons as represented in the House of Lords.
Unlike today, the term vivisection completed the dissection of living animals, with or without anesthesia, usually for the training of medical students, a.
After several Gratzer -known surgeons such as Claude Bernard , Charles Richet, Michael Foster and Burdon Sanderson have been criticized for their work.
In particular, Bernard was repeatedly target violent protest, even from his own family.
In December 1875 Frances Power Cobbe founded the British National Anti- Vivisection Society.
( NAVS, such as: British society against vivisection ) At the time, were performed annually in the United Kingdom, approximately 300 animal experiments.
Back in July reached a less organized opposition to convene a Royal Commission, which submitted to the Government legislative proposals.
A second commission was convened in 1906 due to the Brown Dog Affair.
The first Commission submitted the Cruelty to Animals Act 1876 (about: law against cruelty to animals ) of the legalized bishin not legally considered practice, but they also threw regulations.
The NAVS criticized him as shameful, but well titled [T 3] The law was over 110 years in power and was the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 (about: Law to animals in academic things ) replaced that of the modern animal rights movement  is similarly criticized.
The Cruelty to Animals Act stipulated that they could not pursue because of atrocities researchers, however, animals should be stunned in the experiments should be used only once and had to kill after the experiment.
These restrictions were subject to the condition that the successful outcome of the experiment should not be endangered by them.
A prosecution under the law was only with the consent of the Home Secretary, then Aretas Akers -Douglas, 1st Viscount Chilston, possible.
Experiments of Starling and Bayliss
In the early twentieth century studied Ernest Starling and William Bayliss his brother a thesis of Ivan Pavlov, via interactions between the nervous system and pancreas with the aid of vivisection.
It was known that increased concentrations of acid in the duodenum and jejunum promoted the production of digestive secretions.
By transected duodenal and jejunal nervous, but intact left the blood supply and low amounts of acid adding to it, they discovered that the reaction by a chemical reflex, regardless of neural interactions take place.
The chemical messenger called secretin.
Based on their experiments, Starling coined in 1905 the term hormone for chemicals mediate similar processes control.
Bayliss and Starling have 1899 described peristalsis through experiments with vivisection.
Vivisection of the dog
Infiltration by Swedish activists
The seminars were infiltrated without the knowledge of professors from two Swedish activists: Louise Lizzy Lind -af - Hageby, a 24 -year-old Countess, and Leisa K. Schartau visited in 1900, the Institute Pasteur in Paris and dedicated himself already there against the use of  animals for teaching.
Upon her return to Sweden she made ​​contacts with the Swedish Animal Welfare League and founded a antivivisektionistischen National Association.
In 1902, she enrolled at the London School of Medicine for Women - a vivisektionsfreies Institute with contacts to other London institutions - on the one hand to form their medical, on the other hand to prepare the planned infiltration.
They attended seminars at King's and University College and led a detailed diary, which she published in 1903 under the title Eyewitness [T 4].
It contributed significantly to the polarization of the issue and was reviewed in the four months after the release of about 200 times.
Role of Antivivisektionistenverbandes
The authors decided to attorney Stephen Coleridge from the NAVS, formerly Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales, on.
In his estimation, had the testimony of the women, according to which the dog used for a total of three experiments, killed by a student and also jokes and fun were driven during the vivisection was not sufficient to enforce a conviction under the Cruelty to Animals Act.
Instead, he held in May 1903 St. James Hall, a provocative speech in which he sloppiness, carelessness and torture accused the scientists, possibly so as to provoke a libel action to bring the issue to court and still in the public.
A reprint appeared among others in the Daily News, but also in other local and national media.
Bayliss vs.  Coleridge
Bayliss turned his attorney, Rufus Isaacs, and the libel action was public hearing on November 11, 1903 before the Royal Court of Justice.
In the process Stirling stated that he had in fact failed due to the multiple use of the dog against the law, but avoided the killing of two other dogs.
In addition, the dog with morphine, alcohol, and ether was stunned.
The movements were symptoms of chorea, where the dog was suffering, a disease that occur in the involuntary spasms.
As a tracheotomy was performed, could the claims of women, the dog had whined or whimpered, not true.
The two women said they were ahead of the other students in the operating room.
While they were about two minutes with the dog alone, she would have examined him and observed scars from previous surgery and incisions on the neck with small protruding tubes.
Anesthetics they could not smell it.
The dog had made movements which they considered as "aware".
The court ruled that a defamation vorliege, and said Bayliss 2000 pounds and 3000 pounds costs.
This is equivalent to about £ 250,000 today ( 2004).
About the public reception, there are various reports.
The Edinburgh Medical Journal and the Times reported, the sentence was overwhelmingly positive, were enrolled almost euphoric.
The Daily News called it a miscarriage of justice and set up a fund for Coleridge's costs.
Within a few months 5700 pounds came together.
After Gratzer be part of the Fund, the Coleridge donated later, still in use by 2009 at ransom animals from research institutions.
Ernest Bell of The Shambles of Science and other media representatives who had printed Coleridge's speech, apologized to Bayliss and withdrew the corresponding output.
The AVS printed towards the end of 1913, the fifth edition of the reports of the students.
The chapter Fun ( "fun" ), which described next to the vivisection also perceived as unconcerned behavior of fellow students, was held descriptive and renamed The vivisection of the brown dog.
Commemoration of the Brown Dog
After the trial, the idea of a public memorial was inspired by Anna Louisa Woodward.
She founded together with the sculptor Joseph Whitehead a bronze statue on a granite pedestal 2.30 m, high, into which a potions for people and was built another for animals.
For the statue of the working-class neighborhood Battersea was provided, where many institutions supported the Antivivisektionistenbewegung.
The Battersea General Hospital refused to perform live experiments on animals, or to hire doctors who were working in relevant research institutions.
Among men it was called the Antiviv or The old anti.
Even the Dogs Home Battersea was known, appropriate practices, [5 T] reject as not only terrible, but absurd.
The county agreed to provide a space on the newly opened Latchmere Estate, a quarter, which was considered cheap housing for workers.
On September 15, 1906, the sculpture was inaugurated in front of large audiences and accompanied by speeches by Bernard Shaw and Charlotte Despard .
The inscription made ​​to date of violent reactions.
So the New York Times wrote of a hysterical language as it is usual for the Antivivisektionisten and A [r ] insult to the entire science.
[T 6]
" Was in memory of the brown terrier, which was launched in February 1903 in the laboratories of the University College of London to death after he had to endure two months of vivisection and passed from one Vivisector to another until death released him.
Also in memory of the 232 dogs that were dissected alive at the same location in 1902.
Men and women of England, how long shall these things continue to exist? "
Unrest
While the Institute after the establishment considered legal action in the first year, the situation escalated gradually, as this way got lost.
As of November 1907, there were regular protests by medical students.
On November 20, marched a group of students, led by William Howard Lister with crowbars and sledgehammers against the statue.
There were ten arrests.
The following day, protesting more against penalties imposed.
Another hundred protesters marched in on 25 November.
On December 10, 1907 Rugby match between the teams of Oxford and Cambridge was held in West Kensington.
Under the numerous student audience were hoping the Antidoggers to be able to recruit combatants.
A student mob tried in various ways to reach the statue, but was pushed back by a Arbeitermob.
In Trafalgar Square encounter that day about 1,000 students on 300 workers and 400 policemen.
On December 16, a Suffragettenkongress was blown up by a few hundred students.
In the House of Commons the question of the proportionality of the public costs, which amounted in the relevant accounting period at 700 pounds, was placed.
John Archer, the first African American in public office and later Mayor of Battersea procured that the question got lost.
In the proposal, Antivivisektionistenverbände costs incurred should wear the Canine Defence League responded by threatening the London Institute would for costs incurred as a result of vandalism, which was then still hardly practiced, pay at their institutes.
Susan McHugh of the University of new England moves into the incidents at the Brown Dog Riots an analogy between the various liberation movements, which is a symbol for their own lack of freedom projected into the ( white, male, middle-class and speciesist ) violence against the dog.
In November 1910, a new, more conservative, Provincial Council was elected.
The question of the Zeitmäßigkeit the statue and other pretexts were discussed again.
A support committee for the statue was established by 500 individuals.
The City Council submitted a petition against the statue of 20,000 signatories.
A 1,500 -strong demonstration at Charlotte Despard and Louise Lind -af - Hageby followed in February 1910.
Four city council deputies removed under a police escort of 120 men, the statue in the night of 10 to March 11.
Ten days later, gathered 3,000 Antivivisektionisten who ignored the city council.
Restoration of the statue
Behind the Pump House Battersea Park founded the National Society and the British Antivivisection Union for the Abolition of Vivisection on 12 December 1985 a new statue, which was presented by Geraldine James .
The artist Nicola Hicks designed the statue.
" This statue will replace the old monument that was built in 1906 at the Latchmere Recreation Ground donated publicly.
The suffering of the dog led to escalating protests and mass demonstrations.
It stands for the rejection of the vivisection and animal testing by the London people.
This statue commemorates the continuous fight to end these practices.
Following a controversy the old one was removed on March 10.
The decision was made by the new city council, after the foregoing City Council endorsed the establishment.
Animal experiments are an essential ethical point of contention is in our time and should have no place in a civilized society.
1903 suffered and died 19,084 animals in British laboratories.
1984 were burned 3,497,355 animals subjected to blinded, contaminated, poisoned and countless other terrible experiments in the UK. "
Mason complained, the statue was a kokettierter contrast to his native predecessors.
Hilda Kean criticized the new statue.
The old Browndog was erect and defiant, did not beg for mercy, and embodied a political demand.
The new Browndog same rather the pet of his Creator.
He put out no facts but was hiding.
Unlike its predecessors, this dog would unsettle anyone.
References
Medical
" Exit the 'Brown Dog' ", Daily Graphic, March 11, 1910.
" Battersea lot Famous Dog statue ", The New York Times, March 13, 1910.
Bayliss, William & Starling, Ernest.
" The mechanism of pancreatic secretion ," The Journal of Physiology, 1902, 12, 28 ( 5) :325 - 353rd  PMID 16992627   Principles of General Physiology.
London: Longmans, 1924.
Bayliss, Leonard.
(Son of William Bayliss ) The 'Brown Dog' Affair in potential, the UCL Physiology magazine, Spring 1957, no.
2, pp. 11-22.
Biscoe, Tim.
The Bayliss -Starling Prize Lecture, Physiology News, no.
65, Winter 2006, p.  40
Priddey, Helen.
" Sir William Bayliss, 1860-1924 ", '' The Bugle 2003 documentation at the Wolverhampton University Society of Local History
Vivisection  critical
Lee, Frederic S. of Columbia University, Miss Lind and her views, letter to the publisher, The New York Times, February 3, 1909.
Lind -af - Hageby, Louise & Schartau, Leisa K.
The Shambles of Science:.
Extracts from the Diary of Two Students of Physiology, 1903 First published as Eye- Witnesses, 1903, ISBN 1-152-41333-4 (formally wrong ISBN  ).
Ford, Edward K.
The Brown Dog and his Memorial.
London:.
Miss Lind -af - Hageby 's Anti- Vivisection Council, 1908 A pamphlet that details of the statue and Antivivisektionistische protest culture documented.
Galloway, John.
Review of Peter Mason's The Brown Dog Affair in Nature.
394, 635-636, August 13, 1998.
Greek, C. Ray & Swingle Greek, Jean.
Sacred Cows and Golden Geese: The Human Cost of Experiments on Animals.
Continuum, 2002, ISBN 0-8264-1226-2.
Lansbury, Coral.
The Old Brown Dog: Women, Workers, and Vivisection in Edwardian England.
1985, ISBN 0-299-10250-5.
Kalechofsky, Roberta.
Autobiography of a Revolutionary: Essays on Animal and Human Rights.
Micah Publications, 1991.
Croce, Pietro.
Vivisection or Science: An investigation into testing drugs and safeguarding health.
Zed Books, 1999, ISBN 1-85649-733- X.
Hamilton, Susan.
Animal Welfare & Anti- vivisection 1870-1910: Nineteenth Century Woman's mission.
ISBN 0-415-32141-7.
Gratzer, Walter.
Eureka and Euphorias: The Oxford Book of Scientific Anecdotes.
Oxford University Press, 2004, ISBN 0-19-280403-0.
Jones, Steve.
" View from the lab: Why a brown dog and its descendants did not in vain", The Daily Telegraph, 12 November 2003.
Kean, Hilda.
"An Exploration of the Sculptures of Greyfriars Bobby, Edinburgh, Scotland, and the Brown Dog, Battersea, South London, England," Society and Animals, Volume 1, Number 4, December 2003, pages 353-373.
Animal Rights: Political and Social Change in Britain since 1800, Reaktion Books, 1998, ISBN 1-86189-014-1.
.
The ' Smooth Cool Men of Science ': The Feminist and Socialist Response to Vivisection, History Workshop Journal, 1995;  40: 16-38.
Trivia
Coult, Tony arranged a radio play, The Strange Affair of the Brown Dog, based on Peter Mason's book, The Brown Dog Affair.
With Maggie Steed, Louisa Woodward, Ali Turan and Nerys Hughes was first sent in 1998.
London Borough of Wandsworth Michael Foster (physiologist) Daily News (New York) George Bernard Shaw Steve Jones (biologist) Richard D. Ryder
memim.com 2016
All rights reserved
Page generated in 0.0074