Mar
APR
May
13
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
13 Apr 16 - 13 Apr 16
Close Help
Skip to content
Secret London
London for Londoners
Search
Search for:
Trivia
The Brown Dog Affair
‘IN MEMORY of the Brown Terrier Dog done to Death in the Laboratories of University College in February 1903, after having endured Vivisection extending over more than two months and having been handed from one Vivisector to another till Death came to his Release. Also in Memory of the 232 dogs vivisected at the same place during the year 1902. Men and Women of England, how long shall these things be?’
Riots in Trafalgar Square over the statue of a dog? That was the state of affair in the early 1900s when a campaign again vivisection led to pitched battles between medical students and workers with mounted police caught in the middle.
The controversy started in 1903 when Professor William Bayliss (knighted in 1922 for his contribution to medicine) took part in an experiment on a brown terrier dog at the University of London. Anti-vivisection campaigners (two women from Sweden) who had infiltrated his lecture protested that the dog was not properly anaesthetised – an illegal act.
The National Anti-Vivisection Society took up the case and Bayliss sued for libel. He won massive damages and costs (the equivalent of more than £250,000 today), soon paid by a campaign led by the Daily News.
However, Anna Louisa Woodward, founder of the World League Against Vivisection, then suggested a memorial, which was duly erected in Battersea in 1906 in the form of a drinking fountain topped by a statue of the brown dog, with the inscription above.
Battersea was one of London’s poorest boroughs at the time, packed with slums and seething with social unrest. It was also closely tied to the anti-vivisection movement, being the home of Battersea Dogs Home and Battersea General Hospital, which even refused to employ doctors who agreed with the practise.
The memorial was placed in the Latchmere Estate, a set of new homes for workers at fair rents, with George Bernard Shaw speaking at the unveiling.
The inscription caused great controversy among the medical establishment – even The New York Times called it ‘a slander on the whole medical profession’ – while the memorial became a focal point for those fighting injustice: trades unionists, suffragettes, socialists and temperance campaigners.
Repeatedly attacked by medical students, it became necessary to have a nightly police guard for the statue. When the police asked Battersea council to help with the cost of this, Councillor John Archer replied: ‘You might as well ask a neighbourhood where burglaries are frequent to pay the expenses of detectives who scour the country to apprehend the thieves.’ Archer was a strong supporter of the anti- vivisection movement and London’s first black councillor, later being its first black mayor (see below).
In December 1907, the rioting reached a peak with an attack on the statue by 100 students, repelled by workers from the Latchmere Estate. The students then attacked Battersea General Hospital, which the workers again successfully defended.
Another group of 1,000 students was meanwhile in Trafalgar Square, their protest turning into a battle against a force of 400 police, many on horseback.
Tired of the controversy – and the expense – Battersea council demolished the statue in 1910 under cover of night, despite a petition signed by 20,000 people. More than 3,000 people demonstrated in Trafalgar Square.
A replacement was erected in Battersea Park in 1985. It was moved into the trees near the Old English Garden in 1992.
John Archer
The first black mayor of a London borough was John Archer, elected in 1913 (by 30 votes to 29). Born in England, his father was a ship steward from Barbados and his mother Irish. His wife, from Canada, was also black. He worked as a photographer in Battersea before his election.
Battersea was a poor area and Archer was an outspoken campaigner for better conditions for the working classes. He was also scathing about the fad of spiritualism – popular at the time.
Share this:
Email
Google
Twitter
Facebook
More
Reddit
LinkedIn
Like this:
Like Loading...
Related
*
*
Kieran Battersea , Battersea Dogs Home , Battersea Park , Brown Dog , George Bernard Shaw , John Archer , Latchmere Estate , Trafalgar Square , University of London , vivisection
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
Notify me of new posts via email.
Post navigation
Previous Previous post: The first circus
Next Next post: The Monument and Robert Hooke
Sidebar
My other sites
Inherit The Earth
Rathlin Island
My website
SECRET LONDON
Other London links
Visit London
Stay safe
BBC London News
Olympic Games 2012
Transport for London
TFL eZine
City of London
SecretLDN
Lighting London – British Gas youtu.be/v2BjX1blK4I 1 day ago
"Do you not twitter Gentlemen?" The women who broke taboo to act in Shakespeare: gu.com/p/4t836/stw 3 days ago
@ jetlbomb What about some red phone boxes? Temple Place near Temple Tube - there's also a taxi shelter and taxi rank there. 3 days ago
@ jetlbomb Waterloo Bridge for South Bank and London Eye. Canary Wharf? 3 days ago
RT @ jetlbomb : Hey @ SecretLDN do you know of anywhere to park where we could get photos of our car with an iconic London sight in the backgr… 3 days ago
Copyright
All original work on this site is protected under UK copyright law. Please do not use any words or photos without written permission.
Search for:
Recent Posts
London Diaries
I was just a Poor Boy…
The Prudential War Memorial
Saxon sculpture in Stepney
The world’s oldest tailors
The Seven Noses of Soho
Limehouse Town Hall
A tip of the hat to history
The Broad Street pump
The Bluecoats
England’s smallest cathedral
The first female surgeon in Britain
The crying lamp post
London’s oldest street sign?
Queen’s Birthday Salute – April 21
Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com. The Gazette Theme .
Follow
Follow “Secret London”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 2,546 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.
%d bloggers like this: