MAR
APR
SEP
24
2013
2016
2017
22 captures
13 Jul 11 - 9 Sep 16
Close Help
Hidden Tipperary
History and Tourism Resources For Tipperary Ireland
Skip to content
Home
About
Contact Us
An Introduction To Tipperary
News
Castles
Most existing stone castles in Co.Tipperary have their origins beginning in the 12th century, built in order to control the area immediately surrounding them.
Many earlier castles were originally built from earth and timber, but for defence reasons had their defences now replaced by stone. Early castles also often exploited natural defences, built on river banks or natural rock outcrops and lacked features such as towers and arrow-slits, instead relying on a central ‘Keep.’ e.g. Nenagh Castle .
Large castle construction was often expensive, needing up to 400 stone masons, together with 2,000 unskilled workmen, 100 carts and wagons carrying building materials. Also needed were about 200 quarrymen, together with carpenters, latter for the erection of  scaffolding and the fitting of  joists and beams for internal flooring. Despite conquered and forced labour, where workers were paid, the pay owed to these workers was quite often in arrears, resulting in extreme poverty and starvation.
Tipperary castles were constructed as both offensive and defensive structures, providing a base from which raids could be launched, as well as offering protection against attacking enemies. These structures also served as centres of local and territorial administration, as well as symbols of the invaders power. Rural castles were usually situated near features that were integral to every day living, such as manufacturing, mills and as often the case in Tipperary, to control land, Tipperary offering some of the richest farmland in Europe.
Urban castles were also necessary to exert control over the local populace and to guard against those who would disrupt important travel routes.  Many castles in Tipperary were established by Norman invaders, whose successful Lords and Earls regularly held court with those immediately below them on the social scale.  These courts were found to be necessary to ensure peasants behaved and performed in accordance with the new invaders wishes.
Although gunpowder was introduced into Europe in the 14th century (1320s), unpredictable and inaccurate handgun weaponry were not recorded in use until the 1380s. This new warfare did not significantly affect castle buildings until around the 15th century, when artillery became more manually controllable and at the same time powerful enough to break through thick stone fortifications.
Castles continued to be built into the 16th century, however new techniques to deal with improved cannon gun fire made them undesirable places for future comfortable habitation. Castles began being replaced by artillery forts, and habitation moved to comfortable country style houses with limited fortifications.
Nenagh Castle
Bridge Castle Thurles
Farney Castle
One Response to Castles
Pingback: Farney Castle, Holycross, Thurles, Tipperary | Thurles Information
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
Comment
Name *
Email *
Website
Anti-Spam Question (*) *
9  + 
 =  eighteen
Generously Supported by
Thurles Town Council .
Support Us
Please help to keep Hidden Tipperary online by donating below. Thank you.
Total Donated This Year: € 0
Connect With Us
Search for:
Tipperary Brochure 2016
Hidden Tipperary Brochure 2016 (PDF)
Pages
About
An Introduction To Tipperary
Bed & Breakfast
Castles
Bridge Castle Thurles
Farney Castle, Co Tipperary
Nenagh Castle
Cemeteries & Graveyards
Gravestone Inscriptions In Upperchurch Graveyard
Grave Inscriptions In St.Mary’s Churchyard
Gravestone Inscriptions In Killinan Graveyard
Contact Us
Historical Chalices Of Thurles
Hotels
Anner Hotel Thurles Tipperary
The Clare Glens County Tipperary
Thomas Francis Meagher
Tipperary – The Titanic Connection
Tipperary Museums
The Cormackstown Heritage Centre
Treasures In Lár Na Páirce Museum
Tracing Your Family Tree
Traditional Tipperary Pubs
The Monks Public House Thurles Tipperary
Villages Of Tipperary
Holycross Village
Murder In The Parish Of Holycross Tipperary
Upperchurch Village
Subscribe To Us
Enter your email address:
Delivered by FeedBurner
Categories
Books
County News
Entertainment
Environment
Festivals
History
News
Religion
Sport
Tourism
Uncategorized
Value Holidays
Video
Visitor Attractions
Recent Comments
J J BLACKBURN on Cemeteries & Graveyards
Life Here In Thurles Easter Week 1916 | Thurles Information on Upperchurch Village
Funeral – Former EU Comm’r R. Burke, Upperchurch, Thurles. | Thurles Information on Upperchurch Village
Kathleen on The Monks Public House Thurles Tipperary
Tom Kearney on An Introduction To Tipperary
Links
Architectural Buildings of Tipperary
Catholic Parish Register Records
Census 1901 Tipperary
Census 1911 Tipperary
Cllr Ger Fogarty
Historic Graves
Ireland Reaching Out
Ireland.com
Irish Army Census 1922
Lár na Páirce GAA Museum
Lisheen Castle
Munster Landed Estates Database
St. Mary's Famine Museum
The Source Theatre
Thurles Information
Tipperary
Tipperary Anzacs
Tipperary Walking Routes
Tipperary: An Irish War Story
Tithe Applotment Books
Trace Irish Genealogy
Upperchurch
WW 1 Irish Soldier Index
Hidden Tipperary
Proudly powered by WordPress.