MAR
APR
OCT
22
2015
2016
2017
36 captures
15 Jun 12 - 24 Oct 16
Close Help
MENU
HOME
EXPLORE
Explore map
Explore by country
Explore by category
Abbeys
Amphitheaters
Ancient Churches
Ancient Cities
Ancient Pyramids
Castles
Catacombs
Civil War Battlefields
Concentration Camps
Crusader Castles
Egyptian Pyramids
Greek Temples
Historic Churches
Palaces
Roman Aqueducts
Roman Baths
Roman Battlefields
Roman Circuses
Roman Forts
Roman Temples
Explore by theme
American Revolution
American-Indian Wars
Ancient China
Ancient Egypt
Ancient Greece
Ancient Mesopotamia
Anglo-Zulu Wars
Apartheid Sites
Aztec Ruins
Babylonian Sites
Boer War
British Empire
Bronze Age Sites
Byzantine Empire
Carthaginian Ruins
Civil Rights Movement
Cold War
Crimean War
Crusader Ruins
D-Day Sites
English Civil War
French Revolution
Hundred Years War
Imperial China
Inca Ruins
Iron Age Sites
Mayan Ruins
Mexican War of Independence
Mexican-American War
Minoan Sites
Moche Ruins
Moorish Sites
Mughal Sites
Nabataean Sites
Napoleonic War Sites
Norman Sites
Ottoman Sites
Persian Ruins
Phoenician Ruins
Pre-Colonial North America
Pre-Columbian Sites
Pre-Historic Sites
Pre-Inca Ruins
Roman Sites
Soviet Sites
Spanish Civil War
Spanish Colonial Sites
Stone Age Sites
The Holocaust
Toltec Sites
US Civil War
Vietnam War Sites
Viking Sites
War of 1812 Sites
Wars of Scottish Independence
Wars of the Roses
WW2 Sites
WWI Sites
Bitesize guides
Places to visit in Athens
Places to visit in Berlin
Places to visit in London
Places to visit in Paris
Places to visit in Rome
Top 10
Attractions in South Africa
Tourist Attractions Bulgaria
Tourist Attractions in China
Tourist Attractions in Denmark
Tourist Attractions in Egypt
Tourist Attractions in Finland
Tourist Attractions in France
Tourist Attractions in Germany
Tourist Attractions in Greece
Tourist Attractions in Israel
Tourist Attractions in Italy
Tourist Attractions in Mexico
Tourist Attractions in Peru
Tourist Attractions in Russia
Tourist Attractions in Spain
Tourist Attractions in the UK
Tourist Attractions in the USA
Tourist Attractions in Tunisia
Tourist Attractions in Turkey
Tourist Attractions Portugal
FEATURES
PLANNER
UPLOAD
TOP MEMBERS
Search by keywords
Search by date
Search by time period
Search by historical figure
Search by country
SIGN IN
REGISTER
Castles of the World | World Castle List
The castles of the world are some of the most popular historic sites on the planet. The list of world castles is as varied as it is long and contains everything from world famous castles to hidden castles and ruined castles which are now but a shadow of their former glory.
The castles that we know today really began appearing from around 800-1000AD in Europe. As more countries took on a feudal structure, local lords and nobles began building castles to secure their hold over their particularl fiefdom. Later, castles began to be constructed in a more connected fashion, by increasingly-powerful kings developing more cohesive military systems – a good example of this trend was seen after the Norman conquest of England in 1066AD.
Castles were used to secure a military hold over an area as well as providing a base to both defend and launch attacking raids in un-subdued territory. However, these fortifications were also used as status symbols, grand residences and even became vital administrative centres. In time, castles sprang up throughout Europe and, with the advent of the Crusades, castles were increasingly common in the Middle East and North Africa.
However, the development of gunpowder-based weaponry – particularly artillery – meant that the military importance of the castle declined and soon castles became militarily defunct. However, the cachet associated with castles remained and many of the wealthier classes continued to build castles as grand private homes, ensuring that the list of castles of the world we have today kept growing throughout the centuries.
Nowadays, castle enthusiasts can explore castles in many different countries. The list of castles of the world is immense and can be fascinating to explore. Indeed, the castles of the world appeal to both family day trippers, casual travellers and ardent historians alike, making castles some of the most popular tourist attractions.
We’ve pulled together a list of some of the most interesting castles around the world as well as some of the biggest castles and the most famous castles in the world. Our list of world castles continues to grow and you can explore using the world castles map above or the list of world castles below. Click on each castle for further information, map location, directions and entry details.
Castles of the World | World Castle List: Editor's Picks
Photo by saturn ♄ ( cc )
1. Schwerin Castle
Schwerin Castle is a picturesque palace and once the home of the dukes of Mecklenburg.
Photo by dicktay2000 ( cc )
2. Leeds Castle
Leeds Castle in Kent was a 12th century stronghold which has since served as a royal palace, a prison and as a stately home.
Photo by  Historvius
3. Krak des Chevaliers
Perhaps the best preserved example of a Crusader fortress in existence today, the magnificent fortress of Krak des Chevaliers is a stunning example of Medieval military architecture.
Photo by tatto.be ( cc )
4. Castel del Monte
Ranking high on any list of castles of the world, Castel del Monte is an impressive 13th century fortified palace of Frederick II listed by UNESCO.
Photo by scalespeeder ( cc )
5. Portchester Castle
One of the oldest castles in the world, Portchester Castle has been a Roman fort, a Norman keep and even a wartime prison.
Italy's Most Incredible
Places to Visit
View
Sites, Sand, Beaches.
These destinations Have It All.
View
Why You
Can’t Go to Paris
Without Seeing These Sensational Places
View
Hidden Ancient Cities that
You Won’t Want to Miss
View
Why You
Can’t Go to Rome
Without Seeing These
Sensational
Places
View
Astonishing Castles
Which You Wouldn’t Believe Exist
View
Castles of the World | World Castle List: Site Index
Photo by Västgöten ( cc )
Aalborghus Castle
Aalborghus Castle is a 16th century castle in northern Denmark which includes the fascinating old dungeons.
Photo by BrianTaylor42 ( cc )
Acton Burnell Castle
Acton Burnell Castle is a picturesque ruined English manor and castle near Shrewsbury.
Photo by Dale Gillard ( cc )
Ajlun Castle
A grand medieval castle commissioned by Saladin, Ajlun Castle is an excellent example of  Ayyubid-era fortifications which is now a tourist attraction and museum.
Photo by lyng883 ( cc )
Akershus Fortress
Akershus Fortress in Olso has been a vital stronghold and royal residence since the fourteenth century.
Photo by Eaglestein ( cc )
Alanya Castle
With Hellenistic foundations, this magnificent Seljuk ruin sits atop a 250m high peninsular overlooking the Mediterranean sea.
Photo by Enrique__ ( cc )
Alcazaba Fortress
Merida's Alcazaba Fortress was a castle fortress built in the middle of the 9th century of which only part remains today.
Photo by Alaskan Dude ( cc )
Alcazar of Segovia
Ranking among the most famous castles in the world, the Alcazar of Segovia is an imposing medieval fortress turned royal palace.
Photo by thetejon ( cc )
Alnwick Castle
Ever wanted to head to Hogwarts? Why not visit Alnwick Castle? This historic site in Northumberland is home to the Harry Potter Franchise and is one of the largest castles in England.
Photo by caspermoller ( cc )
Amalienborg Slot
One of many fascinating Nordic castles, Amalienborg Slot is an 18th century royal palace in north Copenhagen.
Photo by salihigde ( cc )
Anadolu Hisari
Anadolu Hisari was built by the Ottoman Sultan Beyazid I in 1395 and is among many Ottoman castles that is definitely worth visiting today.
Photo by אסף.צ ( cc )
Arsuf
Perhaps one of the lesser known castles of the world, Arsuf is an amazing Crusader castle once occupied by the Knights Hospitaller.
Photo by Chris. P ( cc )
Arundel Castle
Ranking high on any list of castles of the world, the 11th century Arundel Castle is the historic home of the Dukes of Norfolk and has been continually occupied and renovated over the centuries.
Photo by lizjones112 ( cc )
Ashby Castle
One of the most beatuful castle ruins in the UK, Ashby Castle was a Royalist stronghold destroyed after the English Civil War.
Photo by  Historvius
Baba Vida Fortress
Baba Vida Fortress is one of the most - if not actually the most - well-preserved medieval castles in Bulgaria.
Photo by Bert Kaufmann ( cc )
Balmoral Castle
Ranking among the most famous castles in the world, Balmoral Castle has been the official Highlands home of the British royals since Queen Victoria.
Photo by llewellyn_jenkins ( cc )
Bamburgh Castle
One of many castles around the world with a rich history, Bamburgh Castle is a grand structure which looms high upon a crag overlooking the coast of Northumberland.
Photo by yashima ( cc )
Barnard Castle
Barnard Castle contains the ruins of a Norman stronghold which was later owned by Richard III.
Photo by lyng883 ( cc )
Beaumaris Castle
Beaumaris Castle was to be the largest of King Edward’s iron ring of castles intended to encircle Wales.
Photo by etrusko25 ( cc )
Berat
Berat is a popular historic town in Albania containing an impressive 13th century castle which looms above the town.
Photo by hartjeff12 ( cc )
Berkeley Castle
Berkeley Castle was originally built nearly 1,000 years ago, but since then has undergone a number of changes and has been the site of many interesting – and sometimes bloody – events.
Photo by stephenrwalli ( cc )
Berkhamsted Castle
Berkhamsted Castle was a medieval stronghold, the ruins of which lie in Berkhamsted, Herts, UK.
Photo by Philandthehounds ( cc )
Berwick Castle
Berwick Castle was a medieval castle, the ruins of which are located in Berwick-Upon-Tweed, Northumberland.
Photo by Charles D P Miller ( cc )
Bishop's Waltham Palace
The ruins of the medieval Bishop’s Waltham Palace and castle can be seen in Hampshire, UK.
Photo by Sean MacEntee ( cc )
Blarney Castle
Blarney Castle is a 15th century stone castle in Cork, Ireland, and is home to the famous Blarney Stone.
Photo by Ryan Lea ( cc )
Bodiam Castle
Perhaps one of England’s best known moated castles, Bodiam Castle was built in 1385. The castle suffered during the English Civil War and was restored before being bequeathed to the National Trust. It now ranks among the most beautiful castles in the world.
Photo by HBarrison ( cc )
Bodrum Castle
Bodrum Castle in Turkey is a fifteenth century citadel built by Christian knights and houses the Museum of Underwater Archaeology.
Photo by tokarcik.tomas ( cc )
Bojnice Castle
One of the oldest castles in the world, Bojnice Castle is said to be Slovakia's most romantic castle, and has a history dating to the twelth century.
Photo by Philandthehounds ( cc )
Bolsover Castle
Once the site of a medieval fortress before its replacement with an ornate 17th century manor house, Bolsover Castle is today run by English Heritage.
Photo by Håkan Dahlström ( cc )
Borgholm Castle
Borgholm Castle is a picturesque ruined medieval castle on the Swedish island of Öland which is now a popular tourist attraction.
Photo by Bert Kaufmann ( cc )
Bothwell Castle
A ruined medieval stronghold near Glasgow, Bothwell Castle played a key role in the Scottish Wars of Independence.
Photo by kyletaylor ( cc )
Bran Castle
Oddly linked to the myth of Dracula, Bran Castle is an impressive medieval fortification in Romania which actually has very little to do with the famous vampire legend. Still worth a visit though.
Photo by Andrew Gatt ( cc )
Broughton Castle
Situated on the border of Oxfordshire, Broughton Castle is surrounded by a three acre moat, and set amongst the scenic parkland of Broughton park.
Photo by Jorge Lascar ( cc )
Buda Castle
One of the biggest castles in the world, Buda Castle is a vast palace in Budapest’s Castle Quarter housing a series of museums including the National Gallery.
Photo by Her Own Journey ( cc )
Burg Rheinfels
Among the more picturesque of the world’s castles, Burg Rheinfels was an imposing medieval fort, the dramatic ruins of which lie in St Goar in Germany.
Photo by froutes ( cc )
Burgkloster
The Burgkloster was a medieval monastery and castle turned poorhouse, court and Nazi prison.
Photo by JamesGallagher (ciotog) ( cc )
Byblos
Byblos is one of the world’s oldest continuously inhabited cities, and contains a twelth century Crusader castle.
Photo by Paul Stevenson ( cc )
Caerlaverock Castle
Set in truly jaw-dropping Scottish countryside, Caerlaverock Castle was an important fortification, providing defence for the Scottish crown in a period of deep rooted rivalry with England.
Photo by andrew_j_w ( cc )
Caernarfon Castle
One of many castles of the world that is now popular with tourists, Caernarfon Castle is a stunning medieval stronghold in Wales built by Edward I.
Photo by Rob the moment ( cc )
Caerphilly Castle
Caerphilly Castle is a vast thirteenth century Anglo-Norman stronghold built to defend against Welsh prince Llywelyn ap Gruffudd. Certainly ranking high among any list of the most picturesque castles of the world.
Photo by The Integer Club ( cc )
Camber Castle
Camber Castle is a huge 16th century castle and fortification built by famous English king Henry VIII.
Photo by lorentey ( cc )
Carcassonne
Near the top of any list of world castles, Carcassonne is a UNESCO listed fortified town in France with a history dating back to before the Roman era.
Photo by Charles D P Miller ( cc )
Cardiff Castle
One of the oldest castles in the world, Cardiff Castle is a medieval complex with a diverse history dating back to the Romans.
Photo by donnamarijne ( cc )
Carrickfergus Castle
Carrickfergus Castle is a Norman-built fortification which was in continual use as a military stronghold for over 700 years.
Photo by edwin.11 ( cc )
Castel Sant Angelo
Castel Sant Angelo was the tomb of the Roman Emperor Hadrian later used as a mediecal castle.
Photo by Vvillamon ( cc )
Castell de Bellver
Castell de Bellver is a striking 14th century citadel near Palma in Majorca.
Photo by cristianocani ( cc )
Castello di San Michele
Castello di San Michele is a medieval castle turned luxury home, hospital and museum.
Photo by  Historvius
Castelo de Almourol
The Castle of Almourol is a medieval castle built by the Knights Templar on an islet in the Tagus River.
Photo by Morgaine ( cc )
Castelo dos Mouros
One of the oldest castles in the world, Castelo dos Mouros is a picturesque ruined castle with a history dating back to the eighth century.
Photo by grongar ( cc )
Castelvecchio Museum
Castelvecchio Museum and Fortress is a fourteenth century medieval castle which now hosts a fine art gallery and museum.
Photo by paulinaclemente ( cc )
Castillo de Chapultepec
Chapultepec Castle was once the home of Emperor Maximilian of Habsburg and now houses Mexico’s National History Museum
Castillo de San Andres
Castillo de San Andres is the pretty ruin of an 18th, perhaps 17th, century fortification in Tenerife.
Photo by LANZATE ( cc )
Castillo de San Jose
Castillo de San Jose is a dramatic cliff-top eighteenth century fort built to protect Lanzarote’s main port from pirate attacks.
Photo by dumbledad ( cc )
Castle Acre Priory
Castle Acre Priory was an eleventh century monastery built on a former castle site and dissolved by King Henry VIII.
Photo by dumbledad ( cc )
Castle Drogo
Castle Drogo is an early 20th century country home constructed in the style of a mediaeval castle. This impressive building is now owned by the National Trust and open to visitors.
Photo by LHOON ( cc )
Castle Keep
Castle Keep in Newcastle upon Tyne is one of the city’s most famous attractions and one of the best preserved Norman fortifications in the country.
Photo by  Historvius
Castle of Good Hope
An example of the reach of European castle architecture, the Castle of Good Hope is the oldest surviving colonial building in South Africa.
Photo by Lars Plougmann ( cc )
Castle of the Knights - Kos
One of many surviving Crusader castles, the Castle of the Knights in Kos was the one of the fortifications of the Knights Hospitaller.
Chateau de Chillon
Castle Chillon is a beautiful fort using Lake Geneva and a moat created between a small island and the mainland for defense.
Photo by Dirty S ( cc )
Chateau de Prangins
Chateau de Prangins is an eighteenth century French style castle and home to one of the branches of the Swiss National Museum.
Photo by peuplier ( cc )
Citadel of Salah Ed-Din
The Citadel of Salah Ed-Din is a Crusader castle situated in Syria which was captured by Saladin and is now a World Heritage site.
Photo by fw190a8 ( cc )
Clifford’s Tower
One of many castles of the world that is now popular with tourists, Clifford’s Tower is a 13th century castle with a diverse history.
Photo by Annie Mole ( cc )
Colchester Castle
A beautifully preserved Norman stronghold with a rich history dating back to Roman times, Colchester Castle was built on the site of the Temple of Claudius.
Photo by cyesuta ( cc )
Conwy Castle
Conwy Castle was one of a ring of medieval strongholds encircling Wales built by King Edward I.
Photo by Robert Brook ( cc )
Corfe Castle
Among the most picturesque of the world’s castles, Corfe Castle is the stunning ruin of a former royal residence, military stronghold and prison.
Photo by conskeptical ( cc )
Craigmillar Castle
One of many castles around the world with a rich history, Craigmillar Castle once played host to Mary Queen of Scots.
Photo by Hotfield ( cc )
Crichton Castle
Crichton Castle is a distinctive 14th century castle.
Photo by  Historvius
Denbigh Castle
Just a ruin today, Denbigh Castle is one of the ring of castles which was built by King Edward I in order to establish his dominance over Wales.
Photo by  Historvius
Devin Castle
One of the oldest castles in the world, Devin Castle overlooks the Danube and the border between Slovakia and Austria and its site has a history stretching back to Roman times.
Photo by PhillipC ( cc )
Dirleton Castle
Dirleton Castle was an imposing medieval fortress and noble residence, which is now a picturesque ruin not far from Edinburgh.
Photo by  Historvius
Dover Castle
Ranking high on any list of castles of the world, the medieval Dover Castle is one of Britain’s most significant fortresses and has a fascinating history.
Photo by infomatique ( cc )
Dublin Castle
Among the most famous castles in the world, Dublin Castle has been everything from a fortification and royal home to a gunpowder storage facility and a prison.
Photo by brianac37 ( cc )
Dudley Castle
Dudley Castle is a ruined Norman motte and bailey castle which is now open to visitors and also hosts the popular Dudley Zoo within its grounds.
Photo by baaker2009 ( cc )
Dumbarton Castle
Dumbarton Castle served as a wartime prison, a royal shelter and a defence against both foreign and local threats.
Photo by gorriti ( cc )
Dunstaffnage Castle
Dunstaffnage Castle is a medieval stronghold once captured by Robert the Bruce.
Photo by Glen Bowman ( cc )
Dunstanburgh Castle
Dunstanburgh Castle was a 14th century fortress, the striking ruins of which can be found on Northumberland’s coast.
Photo by Nick Bramhall ( cc )
Durham Castle
Formerly the home of the Bishops of Durham, Durham Castle dates back to the eleventh century.
Photo by Bernt Rostad ( cc )
Edinburgh Castle
Near the top of any world castles list, Edinburgh Castle is a medieval fortress and royal castle turned national monument and World Heritage site.
Photo by Nicolai Bangsgaard ( cc )
Fagaras Fortress
Fagaras Fortress is an imposing 14th century stronghold in Transylvania.
Photo by  Historvius
Fil’akovo Castle
Fil’akovo Castle is a medieval site on the current Slovak-Hungarian border and the former frontier of the Ottoman Empire.
Photo by Iain Simpson ( cc )
Fotheringhay Castle
One of many castles around the world with a rich history, Fortheringhay Castle was the birthplace of Richard III and site of execution of Mary Queen of Scots.
Photo by offwhitehouse ( cc )
Framlingham Castle
Framlingham Castle is an impressive twelth century fortified castle in Suffolk, UK.
Photo by caspermoller ( cc )
Frederiksborg Slot
Frederiksborg Slot is a restored 16th century royal palace in Denmark and the site of the National History Museum.
Photo by blue_quartz ( cc )
Gediminas Tower
Gediminas Tower is an iconic fortified tower and the sole remaining part of the Upper Castle of Vilnius.
Photo by Glen Bowman ( cc )
Glamis Castle
A magnificent castle in Glamis, Scotland, the French chateau styling and the historic setting provides an excellent day out.
Photo by Tim Green aka atoach ( cc )
Godolphin House
Godolphin House is a Cornish stately home built in the castle style by the Godolphin family, who were prominent in the reign of Queen Anne.
Photo by pmorgan67 ( cc )
Goodrich Castle
Goodrich Castle is a picturesque Norman ruin in Herefordshire, UK, that was the site of a bitter siege during the English Civil War.
Photo by stefanedberg ( cc )
Grandmasters Palace - Rhodes
Ranking among the most famous castles in the world, the Grandmasters Palace of Rhodes was the base of the Knights Hospitaller of St John.
Photo by UweF ( cc )
Grandmasters Palace - Valletta
The Grandmasters Palace in Valletta has been the seat of power in Malta since the 16th century.
Photo by Olivier Bruchez ( cc )
Gruyeres Castle
Gruyeres Castle is a picturesque medieval castle which was the seat of nobility for centuries.
Photo by SidewaysSarah ( cc )
Hailes Castle
Hailes Castle was a medieval stronghold, the pretty ruins of which date back mostly to the 14th century.
Photo by  Historvius
Hame Castle
Hame Castle is a medieval site which has served as everything from a royal residence to a prison and evena granary.
Photo by Peter hellraizer madsen ( cc )
Hammershus Castle
Among the larger castles of the world, Hammershus Castle was a medieval fortress, the vast ruins of which lie on the island of Bornholm.
Photo by A Roger Davies ( cc )
Harlech Castle
One of many castles of the world that is now a popular tourist attraction, Harlech Castle is a dramatic medieval stronghold and one the castles built by Edward I in his conquest of Wales.
Photo by Stephen Fulljames ( cc )
Hastings Castle
One of the oldest castles in the world, Hastings Castle was one of the first Norman castles to be built in England.
Photo by Dave602 ( cc )
Helmsley Castle
Helmsley Castle was a twelth century castle in York and the site of a dramatic siege during the English Civil War.
Photo by Anthony J ( cc )
Hohensalzburg Fortress
One of the biggest castles in the world, Hohensalzburg Fortress is a vast 11th century citadel in Salzburg, Austria.
Photo by JimTrodel ( cc )
Hohenzollern Castle
Hohenzollern Castle is a truly impressive 19th century German castle and popular tourist destination located 40 miles south of Stuttgart.
Photo by mar.krebs ( cc )
Holstentor
Holstentor is a picturesque medieval gate which houses the city museum of Lubeck. UNESCO listed.
Photo by Cernavoda ( cc )
Hunedoara Castle
Hunedoara Castle in Romania was a medieval fortress turned royal palace.
Photo by Craigy144 ( cc )
Hylton Castle
Hylton Castle was the private home of a wealthy family in Medieval England.
Photo by access.denied ( cc )
Kalmar Castle
Kalmar Castle is a fortified castle in Sweden which dates back to the 12th century.
Photo by Leo-seta ( cc )
Kastelholm Castle
Kastelholm Castle is a medieval castle located on the Åland Islands and once home to King Gustav I, often thought of as the founder of modern Sweden.
Photo by i_am_markh ( cc )
Kenilworth Castle
An interesting entry on any list of world castles, Kenilworth Castle is a former medieval stronghold and royal palace, most famed as the home of Elizabeth’s beloved Robert Dudley.
Photo by archer10 (Dennis) ( cc )
Kerak Castle
An impressive 12th century Crusader castle in Jordan, the remains of the fortification of Kerak are an awesome and slightly forbidding sight even today.
Photo by pjo18 ( cc )
Kidwelly Castle
Kidwelly Castle is a Norman masterpiece which still stands majestically in the calm Welsh countryside as a reminder of the tumultuous Anglo-Welsh past.
Photo by Spixey ( cc )
Kolossi Castle
Kolossi Castle was a fortification of the Knights Hospitallers built in the 13th century and rebuilt in the 15th century.
Photo by rs-foto ( cc )
Konigstein Fortress
Konigstein Fortress in Dresden has been everything from a stronghold to a World War II prisoner of war camp.
Photo by archer10 (Dennis) ( cc )
Kronborg Slot
Ranking among the most famous castles in the world, Kronborg Slot is a 15th century UNESCO-list castle in Denmark and the setting for Shakespeare’s 'Hamlet’.
Photo by DaGoaty ( cc )
Linlithgow Palace
Linlithgow Palace was the birthplace of Mary Queen of Scots and host to most of the Stuart kings.
Photo by kyz ( cc )
Lochleven Castle
Lochleven Castle was a medieval stronghold most renowned for being the prison of Mary Queen of Scots.
Photo by DaveOnFlickr ( cc )
Ludgershall Castle
Ludgershall Castle was a medieval royal castle and hunting lodge, of which only ruins and earthworks remain.
Photo by shellac ( cc )
Ludlow Castle
Ludlow Castle, the finest of medieval ruined castles, set in glorious Shropshire countryside, at the heart of this superb, bustling black
Photo by treehouse1977 ( cc )
Maiden Castle
One of the oldest castle sites  in the world, Maiden Castle is vast, well preserved Iron Age hill fort in Dorchester.
Photo by Jeroen Fossaert ( cc )
Malbork Castle
One of the largest castles in the world, Malbork Castle in northern Poland was the medieval fortified castle of the Teutonic Knights.
Photo by Robbo-Man ( cc )
Manorbier Castle
Described as the most pleasant spot in Wales, Manorbier is a well preserved medieval castle located on the Welsh coast in Pembrokeshire.
Marbella Castle Walls
The Marbella Castle Walls were once part of an impressive Moorish citadel built in the 10th century.
Photo by sobolevnrm ( cc )
Middleham Castle
An important English castle, Middleham Castle was the childhood home of King Richard III.
Photo by subarcticmike ( cc )
Montezuma Castle
Among the lesser-known castles of the world, and somewhat unconventional for the category, Montezuma Castle is a 12th century cliff dwelling in Arizona.
Photo by byrdiegyrl ( cc )
Mystras
Mystras is an archaeological site in Greece housing the remains of a city built around a 13th century castle.
Nea Pafos
Nea Pafos is an archaeological site near Paphos which contains the Castle of Forty Columns, a Byzantine fortification constructed in the seventh century AD.
Photo by K.Hob ( cc )
Neuschwanstein Castle
A fairy-tale castle built for an introverted and reclusive king, Neuschwanstein Castle’s idyllic mountainous setting attracts millions of tourists.
Nuremberg Castle
Ranking among the most famous castles in the world, Nuremberg Castle is a medieval castle where Holy Roman Emperors would reside.
Photo by andreweland ( cc )
Okehampton Castle
Okehampton Castle was once Devon’s largest castle and was listed in the Doomsday Book.
Photo by  Historvius
Orava Castle
Near the top of any list of world castles, Orava Castle is one of Slovakia’s most famous castles and was featured in the 1922 film "Nosferatu".
Photo by jonboy mitchell ( cc )
Orford Castle
Orford Castle was a twelth century fortified castle built during the reign of King Henry II.
Paderne Castle
Paderne Castle was a Moorish stronghold later taken by the forces of King Afonso III.
Paphos Castle
One of many castles of the world that is now popular with tourists, Paphos Castle is a medieval fortification in Paphos Harbour.
Peles Castle
Peles Castle was the summer home of Romania’s first king, Carol I.
Photo by Pengannel ( cc )
Pevensey Castle
An interesting entry on any list of world castles, Pevensey Castle is a picturesque ruin of a medieval castle built where William the Conqueror landed in 1066.
Photo by Tim Green ( cc )
Pontefract Castle
Originally a Norman structure, Pontefract castle played an increasingly important role in English Royal history for over 500 years. Today it lies in ruins but has much for visitors to enjoy, including its underground dungeons.
Photo by jones716 ( cc )
Powis Castle
Powis Castle was built by Welsh princes in the early 13th century and has maintained much of its exterior grandeur.
Photo by priittammets ( cc )
Prague Castle
Prague Castle dates back to the 9th century and is reportedly the largest castle in the world and a focal point of Czech history .
Qasr Amra
One of the oldest castles in the world, Qasr Amra is a UNESCO-listed 8th century desert castle in Jordan.
Photo by Steve Slater (Wildlife Encounters) ( cc )
Raglan Castle
Certainly ranking high among any list of the most picturesque castles of the world, Raglan Castle is the dramatic ruin of a 15th century castle destroyed in the English Civil War.
Photo by  Historvius
Ragnhildsholmen
Ragnhildsholmen is an early medieval castle ruin, representing all that remains of a 13th century border fortress.
Raseborg Castle
Raseborg Castle is a ruined medieval castle in southern Finland first mentioned in writing in 1378.
Photo by Darren Shilson ( cc )
Restormel Castle
An interesting entry on any list of world castles, Restormel Castle was a 13th century castle in Cornwall, the pretty ruins of which are well preserved.
Photo by ParkerDigital ( cc )
Rhuddlan Castle
Rhuddlan Castle was one of the iron ring of strongholds built by Edward I in his conquest of Wales.
Photo by trenchdroid ( cc )
Richborough Roman Fort
Richborough Roman Fort in Kent marks the site where the Romans successfully invaded Britain in 43 AD.
Rosenborg Slot
Ranking high on any list of castles of the world, Rosenborg Slot is a 17th century royal palace in Copenhagen in Denmark.
Photo by dun_deagh ( cc )
Rothesay Castle
Rothesay Castle is a distinctive medieval ruin with strong links to the royal Stewart dynasty.
Sagunto Castle
Sagunto Castle was a large Moorish citadel, the impressive remains of which overlook the modern town.
Salses Fortress
Salses Fortress is an impressive medieval fortress in Plateau de Rousillon in France.
Photo by  Historvius
Sandal Castle
One of many castles around the world with a rich history, Sandal Castle was the site of an important battle in the Wars of the Roses.
Shirvanshahs’ Palace
Shirvanshahs’ Palace is a 15th century castle complex in Baku in Azerbaijan.
Sigiriya
Sigiriya is a vast rock used over time as a Buddhist monastery and as a 5th century royal fortress.
Photo by  Historvius
Silves Castle
An interesting entry on any world castles list, Silves Castle is an imposing Moorish stronghold.
Photo by  Historvius
Spis Castle
One of the biggest castles in the world, Spis Castle is Slovakia’s most famous castle ruin.
Photo by archangel 12 ( cc )
St Fagans National History Museum
St Fagans National History Museum is a unique open-air museum of the history of Wales.
St George’s Castle
St George’s Castle in Lisbon is a medieval castle which once served as a royal palace.
Photo by  Historvius
Stirling Castle
Ranking among the best castles in the world, Stirling Castle is an iconic royal palace, a medieval stronghold and a focal point for many of the most important events in Scotland’s history.
Photo by  Historvius
Suomenlinna Fortress
Ranking among the most famous castles in the world, Suomenlinna Fortress is an impressive, UNESCO-listed 18th century maritime fortification.
Syracuse Archaeological Site
The Syracuse Archaeological Site contains the impressive remains of an ancient city including a fort known as the Castle of Euryalus.
Photo by Sandy__R ( cc )
Tantallon Castle
Tantallon Castle was the imposing medieval stronghold of an influential Scottish family.
Photo by  Historvius
Tematin Castle
Tematin Castle is a picturesque ruined medieval fortress near the modern towns of Hrádok and Lúka in Slovakia.
Photo by Darij & Ana ( cc )
Teotihuacan
Though not seen as standard for a traditional world castles list, Teotihuacan contains a number of castle fortresses.
Photo by Simon Pielow ( cc )
Thornbury Castle
Thornbury Castle is an original Tudor manor house which once played host to King Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn.
Toompea Castle
Toompea Castle in Tallinn has been a military and administrative stronghold for hundreds of years and now contains the Estonian Parliament - an interesting entry on any list of world castles.
Photo by  Historvius
Trencin Castle
Among the more striking of the world’s castles, Trencin Castle was the main seat of aristocrat Matus Cak, Lord of the Vah and the Tatras.
Tsarevets Castle
Tsarevets Castle in Veliko Tarnovo is a medieval fortress and was the centre of the Second Bulgarian Empire. Today it is open to visitors and also hosts sound and light shows.
Tulum
Tulum is a cliff-top Maya castle in Mexico’s Quintana Roo region with some interesting and quite well preserved ruins.
Turku Castle
Turku Castle is a large medieval castle in Finland which is said to be Finland’s largest intact medieval building.
Photo by steve p2008 ( cc )
Tutbury Castle
Tutbury Castle is an imposing medieval site in Staffordshire which had one very famous prisoner, Mary Queen of Scots.
Van Castle
Van Castle was built in the Iron Age as part of the Urartu Kingdom and now stands as a stunning ruin in modern Turkey. Certainly ranks high among any list of picturesque castles of the world.
Photo by hanjeanwat ( cc )
Velia Archaeological Site
The Velia Archaeological Site contains an eleventh/twelfth century medieval castle, which is recognisable by its rounded towers and turrets.
Photo by channone ( cc )
Vianden Castle
Vianden Castle in Luxembourg is a picturesque medieval castle which served as the home of the local counts.
Photo by  Historvius
Vranduk
Vranduk is best known for its medieval castle which once served as the residence fot the fifteenth century Bosnian King Stjepan Tomas.
Photo by Peter Broster ( cc )
Warwick Castle
Built by a king, the seat of a kingmaker and vital stronghold in the Wars of the Roses and the English Civil War, Warwick Castle has played an important role in British history. One of many castles of the world that is now popular with tourists.
Photo by tbertor1 ( cc )
Wawel Castle
Wawel Castle is an iconic fortified castle complex in Krakow and the former seat of the Polish monarchy.
Photo by aurélien ( cc )
Windsor Castle
Windsor Castle is the oldest occupied castle in the world as well as being one of the biggest castles in the world. It is the official home of the British monarchy.
Photo by By Ramblurr ( cc )
Yedikule Zindanlari
Near the top of any list of world castles, Yedikule Zindanlari is an impressive Byzantine and medieval fort in Istanbul.
Terms & Conditions
Privacy Policy
Sitemap
Country Guide
About us
FAQ
Contact Us