NOV
MAR
Apr
28
2012
2016
2017
9 captures
2 May 12 - 28 Mar 16
Close Help
Blood in the House of Commons! Two hundred years on, the shocking story of Spencer Perceval, the only British PM to have been assassinated
 
Home
U.K.
News
Sports
U.S. Showbiz
Australia
Femail
Health
Science
Money
Video
Travel
    Columnists
Columnists Home
News Board
Sport Boards
Showbiz Boards
Femail Boards
Health Boards
Money Boards
Polls
My Profile
Logout
Login
Feedback
DailyMail
Home Top
show ad
Blood in the House of Commons! Two hundred years on, the shocking story of Spencer Perceval, the only British PM to have been assassinated
By Miles Goslett
Published: 08:54 EST, 1 May 2012 | Updated: 01:33 EST, 2 May 2012
14
View
comments
At around 5 o'clock on the afternoon of May 11 1812 the Tory Prime Minister Spencer Perceval walked into the lobby of the Palace of Westminster for what would be the last time.
His family – he had six sons and six daughters with his wife, Jane – had begged him not to go to Parliament that day. Perhaps they had had some premonition of the horror to come.
But Perceval, a conscientious, deeply honourable man, felt that he had a duty to attend a debate being held in the House of Commons into the conduct of the government.
Spencer Perceval: Prime Minister 1809-1812
As he entered the lobby on his way to the chamber, his colleague Lord Osborne walking a few steps behind him, a man who had been sitting quietly next to a fireplace nearby suddenly stood up and approached Perceval.
When he neared him, the man reached into a pocket of his overcoat and whipped out a pistol. Before the startled Perceval had time to react, the man had shot him through the heart at point-blank range.
According to eyewitness accounts Perceval, a tiny man of five feet four inches, lurched forward a few steps, uttering ‘Murder’ or ‘I am murdered’ in a barely audible gasp. He then fell flat on his face at the feet of William Smith, the MP for Norwich, who had been speaking to a colleague nearby.
Smith later admitted that he did not recognise Perceval until he knelt down to help him. As the stricken prime minister lay there, a few convulsive sobs escaping from his mouth, blood seeped through his clothing and on to the floor. Seeing how seriously Perceval was hurt, Smith and another man picked him up and carried him to the Speaker’s apartments.
Smith recalled at the inquest into Perceval's death: ‘We set him on a table, he resting on our arms. I think he was not only speechless, but perfectly senseless, and blood came from his mouth. His pulse in a few minutes ceased and he soon died.’
Someone had sent for a surgeon, Mr Lynn of neighbouring Great George Street, but by the time he arrived it was too late. It is highly unlikely he could have done anything for Perceval in any case. The musket ball was so large it had passed completely through Perceval’s heart, making him the only premier in British history to be assassinated in office.
Downstairs in the lobby, meanwhile, about 30 or 40 people had gathered at the scene having heard the pistol’s report. All of Parliament’s doors had been locked to prevent the gunman escaping. But there was no need. The assassin, having discharged his shot, had walked calmly back to the fireplace and sat down again.
As the contemporary journalist Edward Baines noted: ‘When a spectator at last exclaimed “Where is the villain who fired?” a person, who had remained unobserved, stepped forward, and coolly said “I am the unfortunate man.”’ He was seized and his pistol was taken.
Another pistol was also found on him, primed and loaded, presumably in case the first had misfired.
Murder: Perceval was ambushed in the lobby of the House of Commons, and shot in the heart
Now the assassin’s coolness appeared to desert him. As a small crowd surrounded him he began sweating profusely and appeared to have difficulty breathing. Some in the crowd recognized him. Was he not the man who had been in the gallery some weeks before, asking the identities of various ministers as they spoke? Had he not been hanging around the lobby accosting ministers as they walked through, slinking away disappointed when they brushed off his entreaties?
He was soon identified as John Bellingham, a bankrupt businessman who bore a deep grudge against the government which, he felt, had betrayed him.
With that single shot he plunged Britain into shock, turned Perceval’s wife into a widow, and left his twelve children without a father.
Amazingly, however, for an institution which prides itself on tradition and in so many respects keeps history alive, four patterned floor tiles at the place where Perceval fell are the sole commemoration to his killing within the Palace of Westminster, identifiable only because they face in the opposite direction to the rest of the tiling in that part of the Commons.
Forgotten: Spencer Perceval
Gunman: John Bellingham
Apart from these obscure markings there is not so much as a discreet plaque there to inform people of this momentous event, let alone a statue of the diminutive Perceval, earning him the nickname 'the forgotten Prime Minister'.
Now, as the 200th anniversary of his death approaches, it has come to light that today’s Westminster authorities are no keener than their predecessors to pay a meaningful tribute to the only British leader of modern times who has made the ultimate sacrifice.
A group of parliamentarians - including, poignantly, the assassin's ancestor, Henry Bellingham, a Tory MP - have been forced to organise their own special ceremony for Perceval this month after learning that official plans to remember him on May 11 centre around updating the parliamentary Twitter feed and posting some new pages on the parliamentary website.
Crossbench peer Lord Laird of Artigarvan, who is finalising the details of a more meaningful event for Perceval, has dismissed parliament’s electronic offerings as 'completely inappropriate'.
Shock: Perceval dies moments after the shooting
Lord Laird told the Mail: 'A group of us believe that this anniversary calls for a little more than a Twitter feed. We're proposing to hold a ceremony at midday on May 11 so we can lay a wreath at the place where Spencer Perceval was shot. We're going to mark his death in the appropriate way. Perceval was the only prime minister to be assassinated in office. He died serving his country. It's a very poor show to remember him by a few floor tiles and the very ephemeral medium of Twitter. Longer term, I would like to see a plaque or statue for Perceval.'
Henry Bellingham supports Laird’s desire to honour the man whom his own relative murdered, saying: ‘John Bellingham didn’t have children but we share a common ancestor so I feel strongly about this and the point that Lord Laird makes is a good one. Spencer Perceval was cut down in his prime. It’s pretty shabby not to have anything more substantial to commemorate his premiership and two hundred years on seems a good time to correct this. On May 11 I intend to be at the ceremony. It’s a time for the Percevals to forgive the Bellinghams and to make sure that Spencer Perceval is properly recognised.’
Ironically, Henry Bellingham is now a minister for the Foreign Office, the very government department whose callous treatment of John Bellingham provoked him to commit murder.  At his trial at the Old Bailey just a few days after the crime, 35-year-old Bellingham revealed that he had harboured a grievance against the British government because, while working in the city of Archangel in Russia, in 1804 he was imprisoned for around four years as a result of his involvement in a shipping dispute.
The British ambassador in Russia, Lord Granville Leveson-Gower, failed to come to his aid, although the charges were almost certainly trumped up.  Bellingham was a British subject, falsely imprisoned, his life in danger. Yet the British embassy ignored his plight, leaving him to rot for nearly six years in a rat-infested cell, surviving on bread and water.
Commemoration: Henry Bellingham, left, and Lord Laird of Artigarvan, right, want to mark the bicentenary of Perceval's assassination
Unsurprisingly, when he was finally released in 1809, Bellingham was imbued with bitterness against the Foreign Office, and the government as a whole, who had abandoned him to his fate. During his time in prison his business had collapsed and he became bankrupt. For more than two years he petitioned the Foreign Office, demanding financial compensation from the government for failing to support or repatriate him. But his pleas were ignored or rejected . In desperation he visited the House of Commons and hung about the lobby where he would accost MPs and ask for their help, but few bothered to listen to him, let alone help him. He is thought to have approached Spencer Perceval several times but Perceval, a busy man, did not stop to listen to him.
Snubbed, frustrated, desperate and obsessed at what he saw as his betrayal by the highest in the land, Bellingham began to harbour thoughts of revenge.  
In March 1812 he told police magistrates that, if he was again refused help by the government, he would 'feel justified in executing justice myself'. They ignored him. After petitioning the Foreign Office for a final time in April 1812, Bellingham began to plot Perceval’s murder. He acquired the pair of pistols and asked a London tailor to make a secret nine inch-deep pocket in his overcoat where he could conceal them.
Then he went to Parliament and lay in wait.
Straight after the murder Bellingham was arrested and held in the parliament prison cell. Within a few hours he was transferred to Newgate Prison.
His trial, on May 15, was a swift affair. The jury took just over ten minutes to find him guilty. He was sentenced to death by hanging, and executed publicly in London on May 18, only a week after the crime.
While Perceval’s family had seen justice done, his death left them almost destitute. Although Perceval was the younger son of the Earl of Egmont he had not been a wealthy man. On his death it was discovered that the 49-year-old had only £106 5s 1d in the bank, so parliament voted to award his 12 surviving children, a grant of £50,000 and an annual sum of £2,000 to his widow. His eldest son, also called Spencer, was given £1,000 yearly.
Perceval’s official title was First Lord of the Treasury – the title of Prime Minister was not then in use – and although not an outstanding premier, he was a competent, decent man who had steered the country through the upheaval of the Napoleonic Wars abroad and social instability at home brought on by the Industrial Revolution.
After his murder public monuments to him were erected in Northampton, his parliamentary seat; at Lincoln’s Inn, where he was called to the bar in 1786; and in Westminster Abbey.
His friends – among them William Wilberforce, the anti-slavery campaigner – wanted to erect a monument to him in the House of Commons, but some members of the Whig party opposed it and in the end nothing was done. According to Henry Bellingham: ‘He deserves better. He has gone down in history as the man who never had the chance to prove his great potential. We hope there will be a way of securing funding for a statue or plaque and advancing this cause.’
Surely, Henry Bellingham argues, even Perceval's detractors would admit that he should be more than just a footnote in history, and is deserving of a proper acknowledgement at Westminster on the anniversary of his assassination?
Mr Bellingham said: ‘Perceval hadn’t really had time to get going but he wasn‘t a bad prime minister. It’s odd, it’s a big oversight not to have any formal commemoration to him. There may have been something in the old House of Commons before 1834 when the big fire took place but this should be addressed soon. It’s completely inadequate not to have some sort of memorial to him.'
As well as updating its Twitter feed and website on May 11, the Parliamentary Archives, which is in charge of the Perceval commemoration for both Houses, will mark the assassination with a display of records and artwork in the Royal Gallery between May and mid-August.
And on the anniversary itself there will also be a lunchtime talk by the Clerk of the Records.
But Lord Laird and the rest of his cross-party group says it is important to dignify Perceval with a proper, personal ceremony on May 11 and he would like to hear from anyone who believes they might be related to Perceval so that they can attend it.
Lord Laird said: 'I'm appealing to anyone who thinks they are a descendant of Spencer Perceval to contact me at the House of Lords. Bellingham's relation will be there. It would be a very nice touch if some of Perceval's relatives could come too. It's a great pity that parliament has failed to understand the full significance of this. Perceval paid the greatest price for being prime minister. We will seek permission to start at St Stephen's Entrance and walk up to the tiles and lay flowers where Perceval fell. As for the future, we believe he should be remembered more permanently.'
To contact Lord Laird please email: lairdj@parliament.uk
Share or comment on this article
Comments (14)
Share what you think
Newest
Oldest
Best rated
Worst rated
 View all
The comments below have not been moderated.
 View all
The views expressed in the contents above are those of our users and do not necessarily reflect the views of MailOnline.
We are no longer accepting comments on this article.
Who is this week's top commenter? Find out now
DAILY MAIL COLUMNISTS
 
BAZ BAMIGBOYE
 
CRAIG BROWN
 
ALEX BRUMMER
 
CHRIS DEERIN
 
STEPHEN GLOVER
 
RICHARD KAY
 
EPHRAIM HARDCASTLE
 
SEBASTIAN SHAKESPEARE
 
MAX HASTINGS
 
DOMINIC LAWSON
 
QUENTIN LETTS
 
RICHARD LITTLEJOHN
 
PETER MCKAY
 
JAN MOIR
 
BEL MOONEY
 
ANDREW PIERCE
 
AMANDA PLATELL
 
MARTIN SAMUEL
 
RUTH SUNDERLAND
 
TOM UTLEY
 
SARAH VINE
MAIL ON SUNDAY COLUMNISTS
 
JAMES FORSYTH
 
PETER HITCHENS
 
RACHEL JOHNSON
 
LIZ JONES
 
BLACK DOG
 
GARY NEVILLE
 
PATRICK COLLINS
   
  HAVE YOUR SAY...  
 
After disastrous election showing, should the Lib Dems dump Clegg? MPs broke cover for the first time to insist that Mr Clegg must go - with Vince Cable being tipped as his most  likely successor.
TELL US WHAT YOU THINK
RIGHTMINDS BLOGGERS
 
ALEX BRUMMER
 
CHAPMAN & CO
 
STEVE DOUGHTY
 
ADRIAN HILTON
 
PETER HITCHENS
 
ANDREW PIERCE
 
MELANIE PHILLIPS
 
MARY ELLEN SYNON
 
STEPHEN WRIGHT
Like DailyMail
Follow MailOnline
Follow DailyMail
+1 DailyMail
   
DON'T MISS
Her shoulder to lean on? Millie Mackintosh shares a tender embrace with ex Hugo Taylor... weeks after splitting from husband Professor Green
Making a splash! Anna Friel puts her perky assets on display as she strips off for steamy bath scene in crime drama Marcella Baring it all for new show
Zayn Malik set to sell house he bought for ex Perrie Edwards' mother as the singer wants 'rid of every trace' of the romance he shared Little Mix star
EXCLUSIVE: 'I have breast cancer.' Brave supermodel Janice Dickinson reveals she has been diagnosed with the disease but says: 'Don't feel sorry for me'
Gemma Arterton looks loved-up with French beau Franklin Ohanessian as they put on an amorous display after cosy lunch date Divorced last year
No Photoshop here! Britney Spears flaunts her bikini body as she vacations in Hawaii... after being accused of altering tanning pic Looked in fine form
'I've always wanted to do it with you': Jeremy Kyle attempts to flirt with Kate Garraway as he replaces Piers Morgan on the GMB sofa (but leaves fans cold)
Fergie finally sets the record straight two years after stepping out with her dashing 'toyboy lover' Writes Sebastian Shakespeare
Kimberley Garner shows off her incredible figure and famously pert posterior in a tiny bikini as she shoots her latest swimwear campaign in the Caribbean
Blac Chyna and Rob Kardashian hit ANOTHER strip club... as the former exotic dancer 'wants $1million to appear in Keeping Up With The Kardashians'
Madonna 'concerned for son Rocco's education as she vows to get him back in school' after his holiday with Guy Ritchie Amid custody battle
'I'd like to know what's going on behind closed doors': Father of Madonna's adopted son David admits concern over her custody battle over Rocco 
Chelsea Handler and Maria Sharapova match in black bikinis as they enjoy fun in the sun together on holiday in Mexico Unlikely pals
Rihanna puts on a very sexy display in low-cut leather khaki bralet before changing into cream chaps as she performs in NYC Werk, werk, werking it
'My honey bunny': Josh Duhamel shares sweet throwback snap of his wife Fergie as she celebrates her 41st birthday Easter birthday girl
Vanderpump Rules' Lala Kent puts on a cheeky display in Tupac-print thong swimsuit to host Las Vegas pool party She's certainly not shy
It's a boy! Ivanka Trump gives birth to baby boy with a very Presidential name just hours after she was photographed heading for breakfast
Explosive new book claims Kim Kardashian 'discussed the idea of producing a sex tape' as Kris Jenner 'engineered the deal' Not so innocent?
Top Gear star Chris Evans brags he spends just four hours a day working on the show and leaves at 2pm 'on the dot' to pick up his children
Finger licking good! Kristen Stewart and her girlfriend Soko put on an odd display of affection while on a food run in LA... before sharing a steamy kiss
Rita Ora has a Marilyn moment as she wears her golden locks curled while channeling old Hollywood glamour in sultry selfie Blondes have more fun
Sleepy Rowan Atkinson dozes off as daughter Lily, 20, puts on an extremely raunchy display during cabaret show Wake up, pops!
'Indy has not asked for her mama': Country singer Rory Feek's heartbreaking blog post about his daughter's first Easter without her late mother Joey
Getting to know the family! Shia LaBeouf enjoys lunch with 'fiancée' Mia Goth and her grandmother on Easter Sunday Back on good terms
Young and Beautiful! Make-up free Lana Del Rey shows off her glowing complexion and beehive hairdo while out with friends Mis-behiving
Megan McKenna shows off her incredible figure in a skintight little black dress and thigh-high boots for a night on the town Reality hits
'They cannot do this!': Fans of The Walking Dead fear the season six finale will be the end of Daryl Dixon as trouble breaks out in penultimate episode
Simon Cowell sports reflective shades as he enjoys leisurely meal with stylish girlfriend Lauren Silverman in Los Angeles  Enjoying Easter together
Chloe Lattanzi reveals mother Olivia Newton-John's agony over new claims her former boyfriend is living in Mexico a decade after his disappearance
Rainbow bright: Rihanna looks super girlie in a pastel tracksuit and cateye sunglasses as she leaves her hotel for her next gig
Daddy dance with me! Kanye West bonds with daughter North while dressed as the Easter Bunny in heartwarming Snapchat video Showed his softer side
Blindspot's Jaimie Alexander channels rock chic in a stylish leather jacket as she cheers from the stands at ice hockey game Cheered on her team
Coleen Rooney looks gorgeous as she displays her post-baby body in a neon green bikini as she continues idyllic Barbados getaway with her family
Well he is a leading man! Jonah Hill gets his blood pumping as he takes adorable dogs for a walk in New York Star looked leaner than ever
Back on? Courteney Cox and ex-fiance Johnny McDaid spend Easter together as they are seen for first time... three months after calling off engagement
'This relationship is going to be over': Blac Chyna threatens to leave Rob Kardashian for giving her bouncing cheques in gag post Is that a threat?
LeAnn Rimes goes for natural beauty as she enjoys an Easter family dinner with husband Eddie Cibrian and stepsons Jake, 12, and Mason, eight
'I'll be a full-time, hands-on mum:' Socialite Lady Isabella Hervey reveals she's shunning nannies to raise her new born son Victor
You just gotta belieb! Justin Bieber fans greeted backstage by life-size cardboard cut-out of singer after he cancels VIP meet & greets
It's Latex Mix! Perrie Edwards and Jesy Nelson display their figures in super-sexy rubber and mesh outfits as Little Mix take their tour to London 
Macho, stylish, and in love with himself... Pine proved Tom Hiddleston would be the perfect Bond in the finale of The Night Manager, by Jim Shelley 
Looking for redemption? Ben Affleck joins estranged wife Jennifer Garner to take their children to Easter church service  Back together
A Christian Dior gown and love letters to Laurence Olivier: V&A to stage a new Vivien Leigh exhibition featuring more than 100 unseen pieces
'I call it Larry': Adele confesses that she grew a beard after getting pregnant... and jokes that her facial fuzz even has a name Hairy situation
She's a bit of all white: Jennifer Lopez cuts a casual figure in huge aviators as she arrives laden with luggage at LAX J.Lo-key
Alessandra Ambrosio shares a playful kiss with her photographer pal as she flashes a glimpse of her bra on night out in West Hollywood
Kate Wright flaunts her ample cleavage in plunging top as she and her leggy rival Megan McKenna lead the TOWIE cast while filming Both caught the eye
'I've lost what makes me happy': TOWIE's Chloe Lewis is left distraught as she fears for future of relationship with Jake Hall The drama never ends
A family that prays together... Khloe is joined by estranged husband Lamar Odom as Kardashians head to church service on Easter Sunday
Fun for the whole family! Nicole Kidman and Keith Urban take daughters Sunday Rose and Faith Margaret to an Easter egg hunt in a Sydney park
'They are still very good friends': Rumours that Nicole Kidman and best friend Naomi Watts have had a rift are 'completely untrue' Feud claims are false
Chip off the old block! Naomi Watts and her lookalike mother wear nearly identical outfits in New York City Enjoyed the break in the Big Apple
'Try explaining that': Phaedra Parks discusses seedy prison trip with boys during Real Housewives Of Atlanta reunion Apollo jailed for fraud
'She's very sweet': Caitlyn Jenner despite being staunch conservative praises Hillary Clinton after meeting candidate on I Am Cait
Yeezus that bunny is cute! Kanye West and Tyga dress up as Easter bunnies for family get-together... as North West hugs dad and Kylie Jenner kisses boyfriend
Comedy roast beef! Kylie Jenner is not amused as comic Dave Chappell makes fun of father Caitlyn in front of her at club show
Gwen Stefani's sons Kingston, Zuma, and Apollo don matching suits for Easter Sunday... as Blake Shelton joins the singer at her parents' home
Charlotte Crosby displays her stunning bikini body in sizzling snap... after sharing sweaty post-workout video to show how she hones her figure
Look at those Easter legs! Reese Witherspoon shows off her perfect pins in pretty yellow dress as she attends church Sunny side up
Throwing up a smoke screen! Exercise nut Claire Danes sneaks a quick cigarette in New York alley Not exactly the healthiest habit
'Stone the flamin' crows': Chris Hemsworth co-stars Emily Blunt and Charlize Theron perform an iconic phrase from his time on Home and Away
Geordie Shore newbie Chantelle Connelly shows off her eye-popping bosom and spectacular legs in barely-there mini dress Left little to imagination
Mamma mia! Kourtney Kardashian flashes her bra in lacy white top as she carries Reign for Easter Sunday church with family Bra-vo
Forgive me father! Kendall Jenner shows off her stomach in crop top and ripped jeans at church with her family on Easter Sunday Is that suitable?
Sir Paul McCartney, 73, joins his stunning wife Nancy Shevell, 56, as she shows off her endless legs in thigh-skimming beach cover during St Barts getaway
Andy Cohen has a Baywatch moment in red shorts as he shows off his beach body at Miami pool party   Giving The Hoff a run for his money
Mischa Barton bundles up in a sweater and leggings for sweaty session at DWTS rehearsal after underwhelming performance
Fit for a queen! Mariah Carey looks delighted as she enjoys private tour of the Tower of London with her twins and her own personal Beefeater
Wearing her heart on her sleeve! Melissa McCarthy sports graphic blouse as she stocks up on party supplies for Easter Look of love
Baby's first beach break! Doting mother Coleen Rooney takes newborn son Kit for day on the shores during blissful Barbados getaway
Fergie showcases her toned legs in romper suit as she celebrates her 41st birthday and Easter with her family Making the most of the break
Here come the girls (except Kate): Beatrice, Eugenie and Sophie join the Queen for Easter Day service at Windsor Senior royals out in force at St George's
Bob Geldof reveals he considered suicide after his daughter Peaches died from a drugs overdose two years ago  Rocker's heartbreaking revelation
You deserve it! Bella Thorne shows off her tight tum as she hits the gym after indulging in some late night desserts Sweet tooth
Rebecca Addlington enjoys the Easter break with a mystery man just 11 days after announcing she has split with her husband  Ended marriage 
Bunnies, baskets and lots and lots of eggs! Reese Witherspoon and Gwen Stefani join celebs sharing Easter moments with their families
Baby joy! Seth Meyers and wife Alexi Ashe welcome a son... but have yet to reveal name of child Will reveal more details on his US chatshow
She looks red hot! Emma Roberts delights in showing off her newly ginger hair (not to mention her perfect pins) in Los Angeles Flame-haired beauty
On the hunt for the Easter mouse! Ciara and fiance Russell Wilson take her son to Disneyland The trio headed to the park
Oh baby! Chrissy Teigen shows off her sexy maternity style in lace bra and high-waisted leggings at Lady Gaga's birthday party with John Legend
Ariel Winter shows off her cleavage as she takes the plunge in VERY low-cut white clinging dress for Easter Showed off a racy new look
H'We deserve death. We all do': Menacing new Game of Thrones trailer is full of action-packed moments ahead of series six launch The final countdown
Jeremy Clarkson joined by long-term friend Phillipa Sage as he goes to watch Rowan Atkinson's daughter Lily perform in cabaret show
'It was obvious that for him it was done': Lucy Mecklenburgh reveals her heartbreak after Louis Smith dumped her following romantic holiday in Thailand
Gemma Atkinson flaunts her gym-honed figure rocks a tiny LBD and knee high boots as she steps out for night on the town
Mummy's boys! Coleen Rooney shares heartwarming photo of sons Kai and Klay enjoying their first Easter with new born Kit So sweet
Hungry and in a hurry! Cody Simpson skips the shoes and goes barefoot as he grabs lunch in Malibu    Cool dude vibes in California
'Don't put them all in one basket': Madonna posts cryptic Easter message as she keeps an egg safe for Rocco ahead of 'trip to the UK to see her eldest son'
Pregnant Chrissy Teigen showcases her growing bump in figure-hugging white dress at lavish baby shower at Kim Kardashian's Bel-Air mansion
From Russia with a big paycheck! Jennifer Lopez shops up a storm after performing at the wedding of a Russian billionaire's son She's treating herself
It's no yolk! Taylor Swift and her little brother Austin get competitive as they try to crack each other's eggs in Easter game
Paloma Faith cuts a retro figure as she takes her remaining The Voice acts out for lunch... after Beth Morris was 'forced' to leave the show over drug allegations
'Lucky seven is here': T.I. announces the arrival of third child with Tameka 'Tiny' Cottle, 40, on Facebook... but was unable to be there for the birth .
Sam Faiers shares sweet family picture with partner Paul and their three-month-old son... as she leads celebrity Easter celebrations
Golden girl! Lady Gaga highlights her toned legs in metallic mini dress as she celebrates her 30th birthday with star-studded bash
Kate Hudson shows some skin in a perilously plunging black dress as she attends Lady Gaga's 30th birthday bash Star-studded party at No Name restaurant
Youthful Kylie Minogue, 47, is on trend in stylish denim dungarees as she leaves Lady Gaga's birthday bash with fiancé Joshua Sasse, 28
Taylor Swift shows off her tiny waist and lithe frame in a glittering black jumpsuit at Lady Gaga's birthday bash Helped celebrate singer's 30th
Effortlessly glam Suki Waterhouse flashes a hint of toned tum in blue silk co-ord as she attends Lady Gaga's birthday bash Flashed her toned stomach
Coronation Street actor Shayne Ward is 'dating Hollyoaks star Sophie Austin after she split from her husband' Pair have grown very close
Your breast years are ahead of you! Coco Austin makes sure all eyes are on her as she celebrates her 37th birthday with husband Ice-T at Vegas bash
'I found the Easter bunny!' Ruby Rose joins her xXx: The Return of Xander Cage co-stars Nina Dobrev and Vin Diesel in holiday celebrations
Turning heads! Natasha Oakley shows off new sleek shorter hair cut while enjoying a luxurious holiday in the French Alps
Rosie Fortescue show off every inch of her toned physique in racy mesh swimming costume as she enjoys Easter spa break She looked incredible
'Easter cuddles': Bindi Irwin cosies up to a koala in adorable snap as she celebrates long weekend at Australia Zoo
The Saturdays seal of approval! Stunning Mollie King turns out to support glamorous pal Karen Harding at her G-A-Y debut
Tamara Ecclestone and Jay Rutland enjoy a fun-filled Easter with daughter Sophia after she denied divorce rumours 
The Voice's Beth Morris admits she is a drug addict after quitting on quarter finals night: Singer was accused of taking cocaine during rehearsals
Pink perfect! Rebel Wilson accessorises her gym ready outfit with a garish cap as she steps out for lunch in Los Angeles Pretty in pink
Khloe Kardashian goes for low-key chic as she and estranged husband Lamar Odom enjoy a quiet dinner date Dined at Ruth's Chris Steak House in LA
'I would be blessed with a gay son': Gwen Stefani reveals her children's health and happiness are far more important than their sexuality The right thing to say
Still looking back in anger? Noel Gallagher hints he will tour with Oasis again WITHOUT little brother Liam Where were you while we were getting high?
Doting dad Peter Andre shares rare snap of his 'two beautiful daughters' Amelia and Princess together as they enjoy family break in Cyprus
Designer who was homeless says she's on course to be a millionaire after creating a showstopping dress out of 3,000 SKITTLES So sweet
Prince George set to go to same school as his dad and Uncle Harry: Two-year-old signed up for £6,500-a-term in London as Kate gives up on her rural dream 
Lorde puts on a leggy display in a thigh-skimming little black dress as she parties the night away at Lady Gaga's birthday bash
Hello petal! Lana Del Rey catches the eye in low-cut floral print retro dress as she heads to Lady Gaga's 30th birthday bash
She's quackers! Ferne McCann shows off her plump pout in selfie snap with a fluffy duck as she makes TV appearance
Make-up free Gwyneth Paltrow keeps a low profile as she takes her children to a party in first outing since 'finalising divorce from Chris Martin'
Hailey Baldwin puts her toned abs on display in grey sports bra as she hits the gym with Kendall Jenner
'He's a great dad': Anna Friel buys house 'across the road' from ex David Thewlis as she praises the actor's parenting skills
Beige is the new black! Transgender model Andreja Peji flaunts very slender figure in nude-toned lingerie set Shared a provocative selfie
The little princesses: Sofia and Leonor of Spain are all smiles in a rare public appearance with royal parents Letizia and Felipe at Easter mass
'That's that, new chapter': Jeremy McConnell shares sizzling shirtless selfie as he vows to never speak about ex Stephanie Davis again
Reese Witherspoon's lookalike daughter Ava Phillippe is effortlessly chic in a blue cropped top and skinny jeans as she joins her mum for a day out in the sunshine
Billie Piper 'wants to remove Laurence Fox tattoo' as the couple call time on their eight-year marriage Got inking just after they married
Could Bet Lynch and Curly Watts be back in the Rovers? New Corrie boss admits she's eyeing return of old favourites 
Batman v Superman shrugs off terrible reviews to debut with record $170million opening weekend in North America Maybe people like bad
'Devastated' Hollyoaks star Kirsty-Leigh Porter splits from Emmerdale's Danny Miller after his 'drunken tryst with prostitute'
Saturday Night Takeover! Alan Carr and Noel Edmonds 'planning new Channel 4 show to rival Ant & Dec'
Competition for kings of Saturday night TV
'I sobbed for the loss': Helen Mirren reveals the moment she broke down over the fact she will never experience motherhood
Working it! Emma Stone pumps some iron and then some gas in a pair of tight leggings as she spends Saturday getting into shape No rest for her
'I started to run!' The Witch star Anya Taylor-Joy almost missed big break after thinking model scout driving slowly beside her was a STALKER 
Heading in a new Direction! Niall Horan sends fans into a frenzy as he shares selfie of himself riding the tube in London Still using subway
What sleepless nights? Kim Murray looks fresh-faced as she turns out to support Andy for the first time since giving birth to their daughter Sophia
'I'm sickened': Newly-single Stephanie Davis  accuses cheating ex-boyfriend Jeremy McConnell of 'swearing on his mother's grave'... as she heads out
Condom couture! Teen health advocates grab the attention of prom dress shoppers with gowns made from condoms to warn against unprotected sex
'This is the cutest thing ever!' Kylie Jenner shares video of North and Penelope pretending to be her and sister Kendall
Ant & Dec set to be offered '£30million deal to stay with ITV for another three years' Golden boys of TV set for another lucrative payday
'She was broken and devastated': Gillian Taylforth's children recall their mother's split from abusive husband Geoff Knights Revelation
Kim, Khloe and Kourtney Kardashian attend Chrissy Teigen's lavish baby shower where guests ate McDonald's and Taco Bell
Hop to it! Lily Aldridge flaunts her model figure in sheer pink lingerie as she dances with the Easter bunny for LOVE magazine
Is this TV's sexiest ever wardrobe? Stunning gowns that float away and M&S knickers? Yes, it's all part of the Night Manager Moll look!
10 questions we want answered from the final episode of The Night Manager, by JIM SHELLEY Big weekend for the six million fans of the series
Going skinny dipping! Justin Bieber gets 'butt' naked to enjoy the wonders of nature by the lake in new social media share
'He was all over me and stripped me naked': Shane Warne enjoys a steamy tryst with blonde beauty he met on sugar daddy site
Lauren Silverman rocks a beach-ready look as she flaunts her lithe pins in a tiny pair of shorts while running errands 
Kimberly Stewart and her adorable daughter Delilah look alike in summery dresses as they step out in LA 
Babe on the beach: Kelly Bensimon, 47, sizzles in VERY revealing bikini while soaking up the Florida sun Ex Real Housewife of New York
Blac Chyna flaunts her ample cleavage in a skintight jumpsuit as she enjoys evening at strip club with boyfriend Rob Kardashian Romantic night out? 
Gigi Hadid goes rock chick in studded biker jacket and Lennon glasses as she heads out for date with Zayn Malik in NYC
SPOILER ALERT: Things get serious for Megan McKenna and Pete Wicks as they double date with Chloe Sims and Jon Clark on TOWIE
Robert De Niro orders his film festival to AXE movie made by disgraced British doctor linking MMR vaccine to autism hours after backing it 
Love Island's Cally Jane Beech teases a glimpse of her cleavage in an unbuttoned shirt as she steps out with beau Luis Morrison to watch boxing bout
So excited! Jennifer Garner treats herself to mommy and me day at the nail salon with daughter Violet
The Voice UK: Beth Morris and Chloe Castro forced to PULL OUT of the show ahead of Live Quarter Finals due to unrelated 'personal' and 'health' reasons
SPOILER ALERT: Caz walks in on Sophie Webster kissing her fiancee Kate Connor in Coronation Street Passionate moment
Risqué in the afternoon! Braless Nicole Murphy flashes major skin in side-plunging black dress while out and about in LA
Having a ball! Miley Cyrus takes the spotlight at New York Knicks game with sister Brandi after winning coveted judge's seat on The Voice
That's dedication! Victoria Beckham shares sweet snap of 'loving daddy' David patiently sewing doll clothes for four-year-old daughter Harper
Make-up free Ashley Tisdale takes fashion down a notch in casual leggings and sweat shirt while heading to the beauty salon
For the sheer joy of it! Jodie Sweetin breaks a sweat in clingy tank top and leggings at DWTS rehearsal
Adele to take a FIVE YEAR break from music so she can spend more time with her son As she apologised to a fan who was injured at her gig in Glasgow
Alessandra Ambrosio dons harem trousers for last-minute Easter shopping in Santa Monica Opted for a summery, all-white ensemble
Nikki Reed unveils her sultry side in see-through blouse as she attends Sleepy Hollow panel at WonderCon
Geordie Shore's Marnie Simpson shows off her incredible bikini body in latest saucy Instagram snap Flaunted her figure 
The fresh prints! Jaden Smith wears an afro wig as he sprays graffiti while filming for upcoming Netflix drama The Get Down
SPOILER ALERT: Emmerdale's Zak Dingle punches Rishi Sharma over 'friendship' with girlfriend Joanie Wright during EXPLOSIVE pub brawl
'There is no divorce!' Tamara Ecclestone FINALLY denies trying to end marriage to Jay Rutland... after claims she is 'holidaying without her husband'
'He just went into Hugh Jackman mode, it was amazing': Trainer Daniel Conn reveals how Hollywood actor saved people from dangerous surf at Bondi Beach
GIRL ABOUT TOWN: Madonna is set to be reunited with her son Rocco at last ... but she has to come to London to make it happen End of her world tour
Georgia May Foote displays her svelte body while shirtless beau Giovanni Pernice works out on the beach as Strictly lovebirds continue their getaway
Free to mingle! Kesha enjoys an evening out among friends after her legal battle picks up speed with an appeal  Enjoyed a break from her legal woes
Bunny business! Jaime Pressly cuddles up to some cute furry rabbits as she celebrates Easter early with her son and beau Went all out
Leggy Abbey Clancy leads the glamour in a lace white gown as she joins Peter Crouch at star-studded Dubai World Cup party Good looking couple
EXCLUSIVE: 'He'd make our life a misery': Justin Bieber's childhood neighbour claims 'his mum couldn't control him' as new photo emerges
'Hugh and his family are 100% OK':  Jackman plays down Bondi Beach rescue as fans brand him a 'super hero' after 'rescuing son and other swimmers' from surf
The Queen at 90? She's the tops, says Camilla: Duchess's tribute to her mother-in-law as she praises her unrivalled knowledge of horses in rare interview
Sad Ben Affleck sweeps the Internet after star's heartbroken (but amusing) reaction when he's told poor Batman v Superman reviews
SPOILER ALERT: Louise Mitchell makes rocky return as Abi Branning and Aunt Babe accuse her of stealing money from her father Phil on EastEnders
The Voice UK: Harry Fisher and Lauren Lapsley-Browne voted out as former X Factor star Lydia Lucy sails through to semi final Class acts
To grandma's house I go! Kylie Jenner skips the baby shower fun to spend the day with Kris' mother in San Diego Took boyfriend Tyga
Justin Bieber can't stay away from DJ David Guetta on fun-filled night out at Las Vegas hotspot XS Nightclub Firm friends
Heavily-pregnant host Emma Willis means business in a trouser suit as she shows off her baby bump on The Voice UK live shows A maternity glam lesson
Dog day afternoon! Cameron Diaz pampers her two pooches as she rocks a casual look on a shopping spree to Petco Make-up free
Tough crowd? Former N-Dubz singer Dappy draws in a sparse audience as he lends his star power to 'celebrity' charity football match at the Olympic Park
Make and model! Kendall Jenner takes pal Hailey Baldwin out for a spin around Beverly Hills in her '56 Chevrolet Corvette  Out for a spin 
Worth a medal! Rihanna rocks a heavily-decorated statement jacket as she makes her way through the streets of New York Bold statement
'James Martin crying has just killed me': Saturday Kitchen host's last show after 10 years sparks outpouring of tweets from fans The end of an era
Lilly Becker showcases her enviable bikini body in sheer-panel one-piece as she enjoys fun beach day with son Amadeus in Miami
Not without a hitch! Ant & Dec host first wedding live on Saturday Night Takeaway as they make the couple share embarrassing stories instead of vows
Just desserts! Rob Kardashian and Blac Chyna enjoy huge meal and tasty treats after a night out at strip club Still dieting? 
Liberty X assemble: Michelle Heaton leads former band mates Jessica Taylor and Kelli Young as they reunite to support Kevin Simm on The Voice UK
Welcome to Fag-ro! Kirsten Dunst shows off long legs as she shares a  cigarette with on-screen Fargo husband Jesse Plemons Puffed away
The perfect match! Hailey Baldwin is named as new ambassador of ModelCo and beauty will jet to Australia later this year for the role New job
'I am not famous anymore': Lindsay Lohan pulls a Shia LaBeouf as she poses with bag over her head... as it's revealed she's 'embarrassed' by past
Feeling Clucky? Sam Burgess looks very comfortable cradling a newborn baby just three months after he and Phoebe tied the knot as the couple spend Easter with family 
Svelte Jennifer Garner picks up Easter treats for her kids... after hitting the gym in skintight leggings and a gray sweatshirt Always busy 
'It's my birthday and I'll pose if I want to...' MIC's Louise Thompson fluants gym-honed figure in sizzling bikini shots as she celebrates in St Barts
Oh baby! Stones are Havana ball in Cuba: Mick Jagger tells the 500,000 fans who rock into history that 'Times are changing'  Unique show
Miley Cyrus blasts Donald Trump for his 'stupid a** sexist s***' after his tweet about Ted Cruz's wife  Slammed presidential front-runner 
'It's going to be a blast!' Goldie Hawn is exited to make mother-daughter action comedy with Amy Schumer... as she plots return to the big screen
'My little bunnies!' Kris Jenner shares sweet childhood photo of Kourtney and Kim as the Kardashians gear up for their annual Easter celebrations
 Justin Bieber infuriates fans after axing his pricey pre-show meet and greets... because they'll lose plum seats if they take a refund 
Little Miss Sunshine: Kiernan Shipka is cute in youthful denim dungarees and a bright T-shirt as she steps out for girls' shopping trip Hard to miss
Sexy? No, my clinch with the Night Manager was just embarrassing: A revealing interview with TV's most envied actress (who thinks Hugh Laurie is the REAL heartthrob)  
Batman vs Superman on course for record £121m on opening weekend despite terrible reviews Surprise success 
Mariah Carey prepares to fly from London to Luxembourg with twins Moroccan and Monroe after cancelling Belgian concert amid safety concerns
Furious Nicki Minaj pauses Dubai gig to snatch security guard's phone and hurls it across the stage Stopped mid-rap to grab the phone!
EXCLUSIVE: Any day now! Heavily-pregnant Ivanka Trump steps out with her family five weeks after she was last seen on the campaign trail
Liv Tyler's fiance Dave Gardner shares a rare family snap with his two sons Grey and Sailor as they cosy up for Easter weekend Adorable 
GIRL ABOUT TOWN: So why is former Arts Council chairman Lord Palumbo selling his Chelsea home for £8million
Tara's shirty secret: It is a man's shirt? A leotard? No, it's a 'kubbi' - bizarre result of TPT's latest reinvention... as a fashion designer All-in-one
From The Bachelor to Baywatch! Tim Robards and Anna Heinrich channel David Hasselhoff and Pamela Anderson during sexy slow motion jog
'He's a liar': Stephanie Davis dumps Jeremy McConnell AGAIN and accuses him of cheating on her with five girls... as he claims they split amicably last week
Newly-engaged Danielle Lloyd cuts a glamorous figure in a sheer pastel dress as she cosies up to fiancé Michael O'Neill in Dubai At the races
Dakota Johnson and Jamie Dornan ramp up the drama during late night filming session for steamy 50 Shades Darker sequel Filming in Vancouver
'I felt like this is IT': Jennifer Lopez reflects on 'genuine love' for ex fiancé Ben Affleck... and how their relationship could have worked in a 'different time'
Jessica Wright cuts a demure figure in billowing white lace blouse as she parties the night away at celebrity favourite The Nice Guy on LA break
Denise Van Outen puts her slim legs on display in a chic military style dress as she joins boyfriend Eddie Boxshall at Dubai World Cup
Nick Jonas takes the creative team for his new album out on the town after releasing steamy music video Bombarding social media for single Close
Claire Danes shuts out the sounds of the Big Apple as she heads to her off-Broadway play  wearing a pair of large headphones Looked a little tired 
'My sweet husband!' Reese Witherspoon celebrates fifth wedding anniversary with cute Instagram snap With her hubby and agent Jim Toth, 46
'That's the best performance ever!' Amy Adams makes herself cry on command on TV as the five-time Oscar nominee tears up  about hot sauce
Garry Shandling's doctor REFUSES to sign death certificate days after the comedian died from a heart attack claiming he doesn't know the cause of death
How Kate got more regal than the royals: As you'll hear on TV tomorrow, her voice is now plummier than Wills'. And that's just the start 
Jet-setter Millie Mackintosh exhibits her toned physique in skimpy orange bikini as she recovers from her hangover by sunning herself in Dubai
Hailee Steinfeld showcases her slender physique in high-waisted jeans as she celebrates new Wango Tango gig at Craig's
Kyle Sandilands and Jackie 'O' Henderson join in the Easter excitement as they transform into rabbits in a celebratory Snapchat video
'Don't forget breakfast!' Jennifer Aniston keeps her body beautiful with healthy start to the day...before DOUBLE workout sessions
New dad Terry Richardson rocks a garish tie-dye T-shirt as he returns home with newborn sons before taking his pet pooch for a walk
'Change is always a good idea': Emma Roberts debuts her new 'Desert Rose' tresses as she steps out for lunch Stepped out in Los Angeles
'I'm making my kids into artistic hippies': Megan Fox says she doesn't let her sons watch TV because causes 'f***ed up brains'  
'He just lifted me up and made sure I was okay': Zayn Malik and Gigi Hadid win praise after rescuing an adoring fan from a fall  Her hero! 
This girl has been hired! Alicia Keys confirmed to join fellow new judge Miley Cyrus for season 11 of US version of The Voice  Finally gender equality
Egg-cellent fun! Cheryl Fernandez-Versini shares Instagram snap of Liam Payne carrying a pile of Easter eggs as the couple enjoy a chocolaty weekend
Ellie Goulding enjoys another night of partying with unlikely new pal Scotty T as she lets loose with former flame Niall Horan and John Newman  
'You can go f**k yourselves': Adele launches foul-mouthed tirade over pressure on new mothers to breastfeed in response to Jamie Oliver
Freida Pinto keeps a low profile in plunging black dress as she enjoys date night with her polo player boyfriend Ronnie Bacardi  
I know she don't love me': Fans speculate whether Zayn Malik hints at cheating on ex-fiancée Perrie Edwards in new Mind Of Mine album lyrics
Her Little Lion! Perrie Edwards shows off pet pooch Hatchi's shaved makeover as she leaves Manchester following Little Mix gig  
'This comeback is about to get real!' Ne-Yo's wife Crystal Renay shows off her body and C-section scar a week after welcoming son
Not a Hoppy camper! Bethenny Frankel's ex  Jason spotted out with daughter for first time since court ended his $12k-a-month maintenance payments
Grimacing Eric Cowell looks unimpressed as mother Lauren Silverman takes him on a sunshine stroll through the park in LA Not impressed! 
Dan Osborne slips his muscular physique into tight leather motorcycle gear as he takes flashy new bike out for a rare spin Stopped to fill up the tank
Coming up roses! Kate Moss' half-sister Lottie and leather-clad gal pal Tallia Storm enjoy leisurely day out together Lunching at the Ivy
'Arrived in paradise': Olympia Valance flaunts her ample cleavage in a skintight floral top during Indonesia holiday  
What dreams are made of! Hilary Duff gets into the playful spirit as she takes three-year-old son Luca on fun-filled Disneyland outing  
Man of action! Liam Neeson looks the picture of health as he jogs around Central Park in aviator shades Took to New York's Central Park or a run
Real life superhero! Hugh Jackman is the picture of calm as he enjoys views from his new Sydney pad... before saving son from dangerous surf  
Ex On The Beach's Jemma Lucy puts on a very busty display in a plunging LBD as she joins gal pal Pascal Craymer for a wild night out with reality star pals
Life before Spice: NAKED Geri Horner is almost unrecognisable in extremely racy pre-fame glamour shots Showing off her figure
Making millions: How TV chef James Martin built a lucrative culinary empire from his decade at the helm of Saturday Kitchen Good business move
Abi risks losing her imaginary baby, Janet goes missing, and Nancy becomes Kush's conquest. Typical Easter Egg hunt in EastEnders, by JIM SHELLEY
Back to Work: Rihanna displays her shapely legs as she steps out in New York City in nothing but an oversized jumper Stopped off at her NYC apartment 
Just inked! Bella Thorne bares her heart tattoo in leather mini-dress at WonderCon The 18-year-old model and actress looked amazing
Taylor Swift ensures her lithe legs are the main attraction in thigh-grazing mini dress as she giggles on way out of sushi date with BFF Lorde
'I just love everything about her' David Beckham gushes about the Queen as he recalls 'emotional' OBE acceptance Becks reveals all about meeting the Monarch
 Justin Bieber forms star-studded prayer group with Kanye West, P Diddy and manager Scooter Braun He wrote: 'Uncle puff and Yeezy giving thanks to Jesus'
'I think a 'dad bod' would appeal to a lot of guys': Model Kris Smith says he isn't afraid of ageing and admits he already has grey hair in his beard and chest
'Twinning': Lily Aldridge and Emily Ratajkowski look almost identical as they pose in bathrobes Bore a striking resemblance to each other
'I don't want to lose my sister': Katie Price's son Junior, 10, grills her over photos of Princess in makeup and his worry that 'paedophiles will get attracted to her'
Back on home soil! Keith Urban cuts a low-key figure as he jets into Sydney airport to meet his wife Nicole Kidman and children for Easter celebrations   
'It's not part of my life': Renee Zellweger says she doesn't pay attention to remarks about her changing appearance Looks like old self
Sexy Zayn Malik lookalike sends Instagram into meltdown with sizzling photos that mirror the former One Direction heartthrob
Glamorous Vicky Pattison enjoys day date with MIC's Spencer Matthews... after admitting she's 'wary of his Lothario past' Maid in Chelsea
They're mugging you right off: TOWIE extra slated as eagle-eyed viewers spot her using her phone UPSIDE DOWN Shameless
'Thanks Rob, that's love!' Kardashian pulls out Blac Chyna's CHIN HAIR in Snapchat video Shared the images on social media after they arrived in Atlanta
Smoldering! Megan Fox allows a glimpse of cleavage at WonderCon while promoting Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles sequel Chic ensemble
Rebel Wilson cuts a stylish figure in plunging white dress and chic red pumps as she steps out for lunch at Chateau Marmont Looking cool in the city
So in love! Olivia Munn stuns in silky top as she and NFL boyfriend Aaron Rodgers go for a hand-in-hand stroll in Beverly Hills Loved up in LA
Gigi Hadid flashes her lace bra in sheer top as she and beau Zayn Malik cause mass hysteria outside their New York hotel Met screaming mob
Kim Kardashian flashes cleavage in busty outfit... as her nutritionist reveals how her addiction to cheese has to be controlled to just 4oz a day
Georgia May Foote shows off toned abs in a rainbow stripe bikini as she shares snaps from Maldives holiday with beau Giovanni Pernice A look at paradise
Doting mother Sharon Stone gets into the sporting spirit as she treats her three sons to star-studded Lakers game at Staples Center  
Sleek in stripes! Paris Hilton shows off impeccable figure in form-fitting dress as she returns to LAX from Miami DJ gig  
Quite the multitasker! Denise Richards has her hands full as she grabs coffee with her three daughters in Malibu Mum about town
Super looking! Amy Adams radiates charm in chic blue dress to promote Batman v Superman on The Tonight Show Stylish outfit
Leggy Stacy Keibler keeps it light in floral playsuit during a family outing to Bel Bambini with her husband and daughter Their daughter Ava Grace arrived in 2014
Frances Bean Cobain keeps a low profile in shades and fringe jacket at LAX as she emerges for first time since filing for divorce  
Sun's out, guns out! Joel Edgerton shows off muscular physique as he goes on a bike ride and grocery shopping spree in Bondi  
Leggy Ellie Goulding slips into a sporty dress backstage after performing second sell-out London gig Final performance of UK leg of her Delirium tour
Fighting fit! Russell Crowe continues with daily workout routine as he kicks back with sons Charlie and Tennyson during Easter vacation Spotted exercising 
'Mi Amor': Home And Away star Pia Miller cosies up to son Isaiah in sweet Instagram snap during Easter family holiday  
Halle Berry and Olivier Martinez put on tender display during family vacation in Mexico as it's revealed he 'never wanted the divorce and still doesn't'
'It's true!':  Miley Cyrus confirms she's joining The Voice as new judge for season 11 Her stint as an adviser to team Christina Aguilera has been going so well
'My GIRL craved vitamin D': Five-months pregnant Bar Refaeli shares bikini selfie as she announces she's having a daughter Five months pregnant
Spend a night with Kendall and Gigi! Model best friends make funny faces and dance around a hotel room during a VERY stylish sleepover, all while wearing Chanel 
Just nipping out! Busty Bella Hadid goes braless in a skintight cropped cardigan as she runs errands in NYC She seemed to have left her bra behind
Zayn Malik's ex-flame Neelam Gill suffers nip-slip while wearing flattering white swimwear during shoot on Malibu beach Left topless in the sand
'Is your name Google? Because you've got everything I'm searching for': Selena Gomez is beside herself over corny chat-up line as she admits she would date a British guy
Katie Price's son Junior, 10, sings his dad's hit Mysterious Girl before revealing ladies' man ambitions... and even Princess, 8, has got a boyfriend
Nude scenes are out now I'm a mum says Emily Blunt: Actress says she won't strip off or do violent scenes after expecting her second child 
James Packer and Mariah Carey's wedding 'put on hold indefinitely' as friends claim billionaire's mother and his popstar fiancée are 'very different women'
The real CAR-dashians! Cute cousins North and Penelope celebrate the weekend in style with ride in a tiny convertible Went for a spin
'They're building bridges': Sharon Osbourne repairs difficult relationship with Simon Cowell as she 'plots spectacular X Factor comeback'
Is that Katy? Orlando Bloom looks delighted as he checks his phone before a flight at LAX while wearing zipper vest and hiking boots Blossoming romance
Jennifer Lawrence softens a business-appropriate blazer with a silk cami top as she attends breakfast meetings in NYC Dressed to impress
Welcome to the dark side! Former Coronation Street star Denise Welch unveils Slater-black hair as it's announced she's joining the EastEnders family
Hayden Panettiere puts on a super-sexy display before sharing an intimate moment with a burger as she makes Carl's Jr. commercial debut
'I will punk your f***ing a**': Khloe Kardashian creates mock video of North West 'swearing'... but insists Kim and Kanye see the funny side
Still planning to divorce? Halle Berry strokes ex Olivier Martinez's chest as they enjoy a VERY friendly beach getaway with the kids
Bald and bearded David Letterman breaks a sweat in tropical paradise of St Barts before taking a spin in his beach buggy
Harry Styles cuts a cool figure in a graphic T-shirt and skinny jeans as he enjoys time off in Beverly Hills The pop heartthrob wore a Rolling Stones t-shirt
'He's her soulmate': Billie Piper has 'turned to "protective" ex-husband Chris Evans for support' during Laurence Fox marriage split
SHARE PICTURE
Copy link to paste in your message
Find out more...
Find out more...
Back to top
Home
U.K.
News
Sports
U.S. Showbiz
Australia
Femail
Health
Science
Money
Video
Travel
Columnists
Sitemap Archive Video Archive Topics Index Mobile Apps Screensaver RSS Text-based site Reader Prints Our Papers Top of page
Daily Mail Mail on Sunday This is Network This is Money
Metro Jobsite Mail Travel Zoopla.co.uk Prime Location
Published by Associated Newspapers Ltd
Part of the Daily Mail, The Mail on Sunday & Metro Media Group
© Associated Newspapers Ltd Contact us How to complain Advertise with us Syndication Work with Us Terms Privacy policy & cookies
 
 
 