DEC
MAR
Apr
28
2015
2016
2017
3 captures
14 Dec 15 - 28 Mar 16
Close Help
My Books
Browse ▾
Recommendations
Choice Awards
Giveaways
New Releases
Lists
News & Interviews
Explore
Genres
Art
Biography
Business
Chick Lit
Children's
Christian
Classics
Comics
Contemporary
Cookbooks
Crime
Ebooks
Fantasy
Fiction
Gay And Lesbian
Graphic Novels
Historical Fiction
History
Horror
Humor And Comedy
Manga
Memoir
Music
Mystery
Non Fiction
Paranormal
Philosophy
Poetry
Psychology
Religion
Romance
Science
Science Fiction
Self Help
Suspense
Spirituality
Sports
Thriller
Travel
Young Adult
Community ▾
Groups
Quotes
Ask the Author
Trivia
Quizzes
Creative Writing
People
Events
Sign In
Join
Goodreads helps you keep track of books you want to read.
Start by marking “Why Spencer Perceval Had to Die: The Assassination of a British Prime Minister” as Want to Read:
Want to Read saving…
Want to Read
Currently Reading
Read
Other editions
Enlarge cover
Want to Read saving…
Error rating book.
Refresh and try again.
Rate this book
Clear rating
1 of 5 stars 2 of 5 stars 3 of 5 stars 4 of 5 stars 5 of 5 stars
Open Preview
See a Problem?
We’d love your help.
Let us know what’s wrong with this preview of
Why Spencer Perceval Had to Die
by Andro Linklater.
Problem:
Details (if other):
Cancel and return to book page
Thanks for telling us about the problem.
Return to Book Page
Not the book you’re looking for?
Preview —
Why Spencer Perceval Had to Die
by Andro Linklater
<iframe id="wrongBookKindlePreviewScreen">
Why Spencer Perceval Had to Die: The Assassination of a British Prime Minister
by Andro Linklater
Why Spencer Perceval Had to Die: The Assassination of a British Prime Minister 3.50  ·  Rating Details
·  52 Ratings  ·  19 Reviews
At approximately 5:15 P.M. on the afternoon of May 11, 1812, Spencer Perceval, the all powerful prime minister of Great Britain, was fatally shot at short range in the lobby of Parliament by John Bellingham, a Liverpool businessman.
Perceval polarized public opinion: Revered by some and hated by others for his fight against the lucrative slave trade, he domineeringly kept At approximately 5:15 P.M. on the afternoon of May 11, 1812, Spencer Perceval, the all powerful prime minister of Great Britain, was fatally shot at short range in the lobby of Parliament by John Bellingham, a Liverpool businessman.
Perceval polarized public opinion: Revered by some and hated by others for his fight against the lucrative slave trade, he domineeringly kept Britain at war against Napoléon and was driving her into war with the United States despite the huge economic drain of each, raising taxes to new heights to finance his decisions.
Bellingham was not alone in blaming Perceval and his government for their ruinous policies; indeed, he claimed to have killed Perceval "as a matter of justice," and believed he would not only be exonerated, but also applauded for his action.
But he was not to enjoy relief; within a week, granted the briefest of trials that trampled his right to due process, he was hanged.
In Why Spencer Perceval Had to Die, Andro Linklater examines the assassination against the dramatic events of the time with the eye and insight of the finest detective.
Combing through Bellingham’s personal records, including hitherto undiscovered correspondence; piecing together his strange movements through the reports of London’s first detective agency; and using the letters and testimony of Bellingham’s wife, Linklater convincingly reveals, as nobody has before, the outlines of a conspiracy.
While he fired the shot and was solely charged with the crime, John Bellingham clearly did not, as history has stated, act alone.
...more
Hardcover, 304 pages
Published         May 8th 2012          by Walker Books
(first published May 1st 2012)
More Details...
ISBN
0802779980 (ISBN13: 9780802779984)
Edition Language
English
Other Editions (5)
All Editions | Add a New Edition | Combine
...Less Detail edit details
Get a copy:
Kindle eBook
Amazon DE
Online Stores ▾
Amazon
Barnes & Noble
Audible
Abebooks
Book Depository
Kobo
Indigo
Half.com
Alibris
iBooks
Better World Books
Google Play
IndieBound
Libraries
Or buy for
Friend Reviews
To see what your friends thought of this book, please sign up.
Reader Q&A
To ask other readers questions about Why Spencer Perceval Had to Die , please sign up .
Be the first to ask a question about Why Spencer Perceval Had to Die
Lists with This Book
Arquebus on the cover
15th out of 15 books — 3 voters
More lists with this book...
Community Reviews
(showing 1-30 of 109)
filter
|  sort: default
(?)
|  Rating Details
May 18, 2012 Susan rated it it was amazing
On Monday 11th May, 1812, John Bellingham headed to the House of Commons to assassinate the Prime Minister, Spencer Perceval.
He was late.
As we later learn, John Bellingham was a man for whom things rarely went to plan.
However, he did kill the PM as he headed into the entrance lobby and was immediately seized.
I have to admit that I knew nothing about this crime, but the author recreates both the murder and the times with great detail in this fascinating account of the assassination of a Briti On Monday 11th May, 1812, John Bellingham headed to the House of Commons to assassinate the Prime Minister, Spencer Perceval.
He was late.
As we later learn, John Bellingham was a man for whom things rarely went to plan.
However, he did kill the PM as he headed into the entrance lobby and was immediately seized.
I have to admit that I knew nothing about this crime, but the author recreates both the murder and the times with great detail in this fascinating account of the assassination of a British Prime Minister.
Spencer Perceval was Prime Minister during a turbulent time.
After the French Revolution, Napoleon was waging war in Europe.
A naval blockade had been imposed on France; the US and the French had their own embargos.
Trade worldwide had slowed to a trickle and there was economic recession, unemployment, social distress and the threat of war.
Perceval was a man of strong beliefs, who opposed the slave trade and believed in respectable public and private behaviour during the reign of a notoriously dissolute Prince Regent.
Happily married with many children, Perceval was respected by his peers and loved by his family.
This book looks at the aftermath of the assassination, how it was perceived in the country, the trial of Bellingham and his reasons for wanting to kill the PM.
We are taken from trading in Archangel, to slave traders in Liverpool, through the lives of both Bellingham and Perceval, examining who benefited from the removel of the Prime Minister, what motives there could be, looking at Luddites, radicals, Catholics and slave trade abolition along the way.
This really is a very well written, informative and interesting read, which examines the consequences of Perceval's death and finishes by telling us what happened to all the people involved in the events surrounding the assassination.
Lastly, I read the kindle edition of this book and the illustrations were included.
...more
flag 1 like  ·  Like  ·  see review
Aug 23, 2012 Margaret Sankey rated it did not like it
This is a particularly bad example of popular history.
Billing this as NEW research in UNDISCOVERED documents, it turns out that this is a reading of another popular historian's work, which was based on the ADD MSS 48216 in the British Library and hardly hidden from anyone.
Linklater insists that rather than being killed by a lone gunman with a grudge, John Bellingham was the patsy for a cabal of slave traders from Liverpool who didn't want the War of 1812 or Perceval's policies.
There were prob This is a particularly bad example of popular history.
Billing this as NEW research in UNDISCOVERED documents, it turns out that this is a reading of another popular historian's work, which was based on the ADD MSS 48216 in the British Library and hardly hidden from anyone.
Linklater insists that rather than being killed by a lone gunman with a grudge, John Bellingham was the patsy for a cabal of slave traders from Liverpool who didn't want the War of 1812 or Perceval's policies.
There were probably easier ways to get rid of a Prime Minister than a torturous plot, and a cursory understanding of British political or legal procedure is a good place to start before writing a book like this and finding every step in the convoluted process to be conspiracy proof.
...more
flag 1 like  ·  Like  ·  see review
Aug 20, 2015 Ben rated it liked it
Shelves: history , war , 2015
This was an interesting read, although not the easiest history book I've ever read mainly because of the confusing narrative.
Linklater doesn't explore the assassination of British Prime Minister, Spencer Perceval, in an always chronological process.
Instead it covers the killing, the reasons for the killing, then the trial, then the reasons again, then the aftermath, then the reasons for the aftermath, then the reasons for the killing again (not particularly in that order, but I think you get t This was an interesting read, although not the easiest history book I've ever read mainly because of the confusing narrative.
Linklater doesn't explore the assassination of British Prime Minister, Spencer Perceval, in an always chronological process.
Instead it covers the killing, the reasons for the killing, then the trial, then the reasons again, then the aftermath, then the reasons for the aftermath, then the reasons for the killing again (not particularly in that order, but I think you get the idea).
That being said, the story is pretty amazing and the author makes some really interesting connections between what we know of the killing and what we perhaps should know, had people asked the right questions at the time.
Part of me feels this inquiry is just conjecture (using the legal term) based on very few pieces of evidence, but I guess that's what historians are supposed to do when working with few pieces of evidence!
Worth a read, but again not the easiest to piece together at times.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Jul 31, 2012 Tammy rated it liked it
Shelves: non-fiction , history
On May 11, 1812, Spencer Perceval, the prime minister of Great Britain, was fatally shot in the lobby of Parliament by John Bellingham, a Liverpool businessman.
Spencer Perceval is the only British prime minister to be assassinated.
Perceval had deeply divided the British public.
Some loved him others hated him for his fight against the lucrative slave trade and driving Britain into a war with the United States despite the economic consequences to both countries.
Bellingham was not alone in blam On May 11, 1812, Spencer Perceval, the prime minister of Great Britain, was fatally shot in the lobby of Parliament by John Bellingham, a Liverpool businessman.
Spencer Perceval is the only British prime minister to be assassinated.
Perceval had deeply divided the British public.
Some loved him others hated him for his fight against the lucrative slave trade and driving Britain into a war with the United States despite the economic consequences to both countries.
Bellingham was not alone in blaming Perceval for economic ruin and he claimed to have killed Perceval "as a matter of justice," and believed he would not only be exonerated, but also applauded for his action.
But Bellingham was granted the briefest of trials that trampled his right to due process, he was hanged.
Author Andro Linklater examines the records including recently discovered correspondence and personal records to convincing show there was a conspiracy.
Linklater shows the prime ministers personal and public life and discusses the economic and political climate of the time.
He believes while Bellingham clearly fired they shot, he did not act alone.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Oct 27, 2012 Pamela rated it liked it
This book caught my eye at the library.
Having never heard of Perceval, or of any assassination of a British PM, I thought it was a novel.
Halfway through reading this speculative history of Perceval’s murder, or more accurately, his assassin, I realized my first thought wasn’t far wide of the mark.
Perceval was shot point-blank in the chest and the assassin, John Bellingham, immediately took responsibility.
There was an inquiry, a committal, a trial and a hanging of the man who claimed sole res This book caught my eye at the library.
Having never heard of Perceval, or of any assassination of a British PM, I thought it was a novel.
Halfway through reading this speculative history of Perceval’s murder, or more accurately, his assassin, I realized my first thought wasn’t far wide of the mark.
Perceval was shot point-blank in the chest and the assassin, John Bellingham, immediately took responsibility.
There was an inquiry, a committal, a trial and a hanging of the man who claimed sole responsibility for the murder - which he considered simply as an act of justice for himself.
Before the trial ended, the government was able to assure itself that their man was a lone wolf and not part of a wider political plot to bring down the government or foment a revolution.
Linklater casts doubt on their assessment.
Adopting a time-honored tradition, he follows the money, and the trail leads to.... Well, I’m not going to put in a spoiler except to say that his investigations lead us into the heart of the economic woes suffered by ordinary Britons, but especially traders, by the British government’s efforts - apparently hammered into place by Perceval’s obstinacy and religious beliefs - to control the Atlantic trade and, specifically, to uphold its bans on the slave trade.
Linklater presents a cogent theory that is spoiled, I think, by his novelistic techniques.
He gives us psycho-babble to explain Bellingham’s deluded thought process - Perceval’s murder was a “sublime” act à la the contemporary Romantic movement in art, architecture and poetry.
The assassin’s father was an artist and therefore this beauty versus the sublime dichotomy was embedded in his son’s psyche???
A serious s-t-r-e-t-c-h, and yet the author repeatedly refers to it.
He also casts a famous Bow Street runner as his surrogate detective.
Linklater suggests that had this brilliant man, one John Vickery, been given the brief he would have followed the same money trail that leads Linklater to his own slightly dodgy conclusions.
Linklater also comments that Bellingham’s timing was tragically off.
Had he “shot the Prime Minister in April, the news would have reached the United States in time to prevent the outbreak of war” in 1812.
Perhaps.
But given the complications of international diplomacy and national imperatives, perhaps not.
Amusing quote culled from Wikipedia:
A contemporary MP Henry Grattan, used a naval analogy to describe Perceval: "He is not a ship-of-the-line, but he carries many guns, is tight-built and is out in all weathers".
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Dec 04, 2012 Adebayo Oyagbola rated it liked it
Although we know from the get go the name of the man who fired the fatal shot that killed Spencer Perceval, this is a whodunit in the classical sense.
It sets out to discover the shadowy figures behind the presumed conspiracy to assassinate the prime minister.
As conspiracy theories go, it is a highly unlikely story, one that converts the possible, at every turn, into not only the plausible or probable but, indeed, the proven.
The narrative turns logic upside down and decides that because a scen Although we know from the get go the name of the man who fired the fatal shot that killed Spencer Perceval, this is a whodunit in the classical sense.
It sets out to discover the shadowy figures behind the presumed conspiracy to assassinate the prime minister.
As conspiracy theories go, it is a highly unlikely story, one that converts the possible, at every turn, into not only the plausible or probable but, indeed, the proven.
The narrative turns logic upside down and decides that because a scenario could have transpired it did happen, unless proof is shown that it did not.
Nevertheless, the book has indisputable and unalloyed benefit.
It sets out, as no other book I have read has done, an account not only of the parliamentary battles that led to the abolition of slavery but indeed of the practical steps that were required to give effect to the abolitionist's humane and 'providential fervour.
It also shows how a humourless and witless belief in predestination may have been responsible for the defeat of the peril that Napoleon constituted.
All told it is a book replete with arcane historical titbits but one that tells a weak story.
Nevertheless, well worth reading.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Oct 23, 2012 Shelley rated it liked it
Shelves: british-history-georgian
This is an odd book with entirely too much soul-gazing.
It's a superficial and sensational history of a complicated event, and in order to provide the necessary background, there's a lot of tension between the history and background (Orders in Council, slave trade, the politics that made Perceval PM) and conjecture and odd, sweeping statements.
The only British PM ever assassinated was poor Spencer Perceval, the family man, Evangelical-leaning Conservative stick-in-the-mud, on May 11, 1812.
The as This is an odd book with entirely too much soul-gazing.
It's a superficial and sensational history of a complicated event, and in order to provide the necessary background, there's a lot of tension between the history and background (Orders in Council, slave trade, the politics that made Perceval PM) and conjecture and odd, sweeping statements.
The only British PM ever assassinated was poor Spencer Perceval, the family man, Evangelical-leaning Conservative stick-in-the-mud, on May 11, 1812.
The assassin was John Bellingham, an accountant and would-be businessman with grievances against the government.
As a fiction editor, point of view errors drive me crazy.
One place I never expect to see them is in a work of non-fiction.
I don't ever want to read that someone was a "typically stubborn, flinty-souled Yankee trader" because that's a judgment, not an observation.
(Also, that's my New England heritage being tossed around like a pejorative.)
Another statement -- "The conflict in John Bellingham's nature between the beautiful and the sublime became extreme" -- is not only ridiculous, it's all invention.
Who knows what Bellingham had in his nature?
In a work of non-fiction, I don't want to read conjecture.
I want to read history.
Facts.
Sources.
Not soul-gazing.
There were enough minor errors, like describing the Prince Regent's wife Caroline as an attractive woman (she wasn't), or describing American settlers as "moving onto the prairies" that I found myself doubting other recitations of facts.
The idea that Bellingham wasn't a lone shooter is intriguing.
If there's any real evidence for it, I didn't see it in this work.
It could be that by the time I reached the end, I was doubting the veracity of everything I was reading (unless a direct quote).
The potential for a very interesting book was here -- it would have required more research, better editing, and better weaving together of the facts, as well as toning down the grandiose value judgments.
I did learn some new things, and the notes were useful.
So there's that.
I'd probably give this 2.5 stars, but am rounding up to 3.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
May 07, 2014 David Hurst rated it it was ok
Shelves: history
The story behind this book would have made a good plot for an historical novel, but this book is way too thin on evidence.
For example, a specific American banker is accused of contracting for Spencer Perceval's murder, with no evidence except that he would have benefited.
Slandering dead men with absolutely no data is not good enough.
Some of the factual history is interesting.
.
flag Like  ·  see review
Dec 16, 2013 Olivia Helling rated it really liked it
Shelves: regency-research-secondary-source
Maybe the author is right or maybe he's wrong about Bellingham's conspiracy.
It did seem odd that a man who's completely broke could afford to support two households, his own boarding room and his family's.
What I really enjoyed was the politics and economics leading up to 1812.
Perceval Spencer was trying to do a great thing by restricting the traffic of slaves (saving an estimated 40,000 a year) and was steeped in family values, he was a ruthless man when it came to his ideals.
And very zealou Maybe the author is right or maybe he's wrong about Bellingham's conspiracy.
It did seem odd that a man who's completely broke could afford to support two households, his own boarding room and his family's.
What I really enjoyed was the politics and economics leading up to 1812.
Perceval Spencer was trying to do a great thing by restricting the traffic of slaves (saving an estimated 40,000 a year) and was steeped in family values, he was a ruthless man when it came to his ideals.
And very zealous in his religious beliefs.
Bellingham was also a bit strange, obsessed with his idea of justice.
A business trade had gone bad, how exactly did the British government owe him a hundred thousand pounds?
Bellingham and Spencer were much the same -- dedicated to do what they felt was right.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Dec 09, 2015 Claire Baxter rated it liked it
It was interesting to have the event and Bellingham's background put into the historical context of the war with Napoleon and approaching war with the US, and also the anti-slavery movement and I really liked the way it tied all those events together.
As a narrative though I found my interest came and went.
It didn't really hold me the whole way through and I found it easy to put it down.
flag Like  ·  see review
Jul 08, 2013 Sean O'Hara rated it it was ok
Shelves: history-europe , true-crime , assassination , politics , conspiracy
Is there any assassination that hasn't inspired some harebrained conspiracy?
I'm sure there are books out there claiming Roscoe Conkling put Guiteau up to killing Garfield, and Octavius framed Brutus and Cassius.
This is about as silly -- Bellingham was every bit as much of a deranged nutjob as Guiteau, with eerily similar motives, but Linklater insists that Liverpool merchants, upset with the curtailment of the slave trade and Perceval's antagonism towards the US, were somehow behind Bellingham Is there any assassination that hasn't inspired some harebrained conspiracy?
I'm sure there are books out there claiming Roscoe Conkling put Guiteau up to killing Garfield, and Octavius framed Brutus and Cassius.
This is about as silly -- Bellingham was every bit as much of a deranged nutjob as Guiteau, with eerily similar motives, but Linklater insists that Liverpool merchants, upset with the curtailment of the slave trade and Perceval's antagonism towards the US, were somehow behind Bellingham's actions.
Linklater's narrative often goes rambling through dark alleys in an attempt to build a case, but he absolutely fails to bring things together even at the most basic level of explaining what the conspirators are supposed to have done.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Oct 09, 2013 Kathleen rated it really liked it
Shelves: 2013 , history , nonfiction
Pretty good book.
It outlines the assassination of Britain's Prime Minister in 1812, who remains to date the only British PM ever to be assassinated and with luck, will remain so.
At any rate, Linklater examines the assassination in great detail and comes up with a really intriguing theory as to the motives behind Perceval's murder, beyond the ones stated by his killer, John Bellingham.
He links it pretty inexorably to the War of 1812.
I recommend it if you're interested in the time period, the Pretty good book.
It outlines the assassination of Britain's Prime Minister in 1812, who remains to date the only British PM ever to be assassinated and with luck, will remain so.
At any rate, Linklater examines the assassination in great detail and comes up with a really intriguing theory as to the motives behind Perceval's murder, beyond the ones stated by his killer, John Bellingham.
He links it pretty inexorably to the War of 1812.
I recommend it if you're interested in the time period, the War of 1812, British government, the end of the British slave trade, or, you know, stuff.
History stuff.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
May 30, 2014 Cam rated it liked it
Perhaps a little dry in places, but a fascinating look at a forgotten part of British history.
flag Like  ·  see review
May 31, 2013 Caroline Taggart rated it really liked it
Extraordinary account of the murder of an almost forgotten Prime Minister by a forgotten madman.
But was he just a lunatic who believed passionately that the Prime Minister had failed to right a wrong?
Or was John Bellingham pushed to commit this murder by vested interests who were deeply involved in the slave trade and the damage to their businesses done by war with France and threatened war with America?
I don't know the answer to this question, but Andro Linklater's case is engrossing and his Extraordinary account of the murder of an almost forgotten Prime Minister by a forgotten madman.
But was he just a lunatic who believed passionately that the Prime Minister had failed to right a wrong?
Or was John Bellingham pushed to commit this murder by vested interests who were deeply involved in the slave trade and the damage to their businesses done by war with France and threatened war with America?
I don't know the answer to this question, but Andro Linklater's case is engrossing and his portrayal of poor obsessed Bellingham very touching.
...more
flag Like  ·  see review
Aug 08, 2013 Ellenw rated it really liked it
Reading this book left me hungry for more.
Of what I wasn't sure, but I wanted Linklater's depth, humor, sensitivity brought to every major event in history.
If this is what he can do with the reasonably sut-and-dry history of Spencer Perceval's death then I am left to only imagine what he could do with any of the other mysteries of history.
Also, Spencer Perceval sounds like a jerk.
Just had to mention that.
Linklater is very kind to the man so I have to get that information out somewhere.
flag Like  ·  see review
Dec 08, 2012 John rated it liked it
Shelves: history
Audible version.
Interesting discussion of the only successful assassination of a British Prime Minister in 1812.
The author can't quite make the assassination a conspiracy, but shows that many elements of society--especially Liverpool merchants who traded with the US and slavers--had strong motives to get him out of the way.
flag Like  ·  see review
Apr 26, 2013 John rated it really liked it
This book is about the only British Prime Minister who was assassinated, and about the policies he adopted which led to his demise.
A fascinating read about a seldom discussed topic of history.
I really enjoyed it.
flag Like  ·  see review
Jul 20, 2012 Tom rated it really liked it
Shelves: british-history
hate this "new sytle" of foot notes
flag Like  ·  see review
Jul 16, 2012 Angus rated it liked it
.
flag Like  ·  see review
Al rated it liked it
Feb 23, 2016
Josiah marked it as to-read
Feb 09, 2016
Nicole added it
Feb 08, 2016
Derek J. Craig rated it really liked it
Jan 22, 2016
Lisa Christian marked it as to-read
Jan 20, 2016
Laurence Parker-Brown rated it it was amazing
Jan 21, 2016
Greg marked it as to-read
Nov 11, 2015
Pavel added it
Sep 02, 2015
Ghiop rated it liked it
Jul 31, 2015
Keith rated it it was amazing
Jul 20, 2015
Dennis rated it really liked it
Jun 16, 2015
« previous 1 2 3 4 next »
new topic
Discuss This Book
There are no discussion topics on this book yet.
Be the first to start one »
Recommend It  |  Stats  |  Recent Status Updates
Genres
Non Fiction
6 users
History
6 users
Politics
2 users
See top shelves…
Books by Andro Linklater
More…
Share This Book
Tweet
Share on your website
title link
preview:
Why Spencer Perceval Had to Die: The Assassination of a British Prime Minister
avg rating
preview:
Why Spencer Perceval Had to Die: The Assassination of a British Prime Minister
Goodreads rating: 3.50 (52 ratings)
small image
preview: click here
[close]
med image
preview: click here
[close]
BBCode
[url=http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13166685-why-spencer-perceval-had-to-die?utm_medium=api&utm_source=blog_book][img]http://d.gr-assets.com/books/1338068023l/13166685.jpg[/img][/url]       [url=http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13166685-why-spencer-perceval-had-to-die?utm_medium=api&utm_source=blog_book]Why Spencer Perceval Had to Die: The Assassination of a British Prime Minister by Andro Linklater[/url]
+ Share on your website
Trivia About Why Spencer Perce...
No trivia or quizzes yet.
Add some now »
© 2016 Goodreads Inc
about us
advertise
author program
jobs
api
our blog
authors & advertisers blog
terms
privacy
help
switch to: mobile version
Welcome back.
Just a moment while we sign you in to your Goodreads account.