Jonathan Jones on art
Why Albrecht Altdorfer's masterpiece gives me nightmares
Painted with the kind of conviction that scorns humanity, is this key work of Renaissance art actually a harbinger of fascism?
Feasting magnificently on slaughter ... The Battle of Issus by Albrecht Altdorfer. Photograph: Bridgeman Art Library
Thursday 27 May 2010 09.27 EDT
Last modified on Tuesday 29 December 2015 08.56 EST
Share on WhatsApp
Is this the scariest painting in the world? The Battle of Issus by Albrecht Altdorfer – known in German simply as the Alexanderschlacht or Alexander battle – is a wonder. It has something about it of an object in a cabinet of curiosities: as if it were contrived specifically to induce feelings of puzzlement, perplexity and unease.
In a landscape created with hypnotic spatial conviction, yet located in a spiralling, outer-space vista of blue and silver sky and sea, a world at once real and bizarrely transformed, illuminated by both sun and moon, and with a classical inscription hanging uncannily in the heavens, two vast armies fight for the future of the world. Uncountable legions fill the rocky plain beneath towering mountains.
It is the quintessence of German Renaissance art: every mountain a colossus, every ray of sun an apocalyptic beam of fire from heaven, every cloud a glimpse of the infinite. This is war as unholy spectacle, but where is the humanity? Where is the pity?
"Seriously, old man," says Orson Welles as Harry Lime in The Third Man , looking down from Vienna's big wheel at the crowds below, "would you really care if one of those dots stopped moving?" The multitudes who mass the Alexanderschlacht do not make us care – we do not mind if they stop moving. Indeed, they are not moving: this is a stilled vision, a frozen prophecy.
It was painted in 1529 as part of a cycle of history paintings commissioned by the duke of Bavaria: today these works hang together in their own room in the Alte Pinakothek in Munich, dominated by the entrancing horror and beauty of Altdorfer's masterpiece. Connoisseurs of culture wars may note that it portrays a classic confrontation between east and west, when Alexander the Great defeated the Persian king Darius in 333BC.
The reason it frightens me is that it feasts so magnificently on the inhuman slaughter it portrays. This is war seen by a boy knocking over an array of toy soldiers, or an apocalyptic preacher – the myriad vulnerable bodies are just part of the dazzlement of it all. From the Alte Pinakothek – truly one of Europe's richest art collections – you can walk through Munich to the House of German Art , built for Adolf Hitler, today a benign contemporary venue. Hitler made Munich his art capital. As it happened, he also showed as little humanity as this painting does when told of vast casualties in the war he created . Anti-war paintings tend to focus on the intimate horror of close-combat ; in seeing soldiers and their victims from a distance as ants, this painting anticipates the worst of 20th-century fascism.