JUL
MAR
Apr
16
2015
2016
2017
4 captures
30 Jan 14 - 16 Mar 16
Close Help
Yesterday Unhinged
The Flotsam & Jetsam of Yesterday
Image
January 22, 2014
by Yesterday Unhinged
War Paint (Part 2): The Battle of Alexander at Issus
Part 2 in a 10 part series on war in art.
The Battle of Alexander at Issus is one of the most epic pieces of art you may ever lay eyes on. It was painted by Albrecht Altdorfer in 1529 after being commissioned by Duke William IV of Bavaria. It shows Alexander the Great’s resounding victory over Darius III of Persia at the Battle of Issus which took place in 333 BC. It was the decisive battle of the Macedonian king’s subjegation of the Persian Empire. The battle was a rout and King Darius fled, leaving behind his wife and children, who were taken into captivity. Darius himself would be captured a few short years later, never having been able to amount a response to his crushing defeat at Issus. Alexander would go on to form the largest empire in the Ancient World.
Albrecht Altdorfer (c. 1480—1538) — a German painter, engraver and architect of the Renaissance. By Phillip Killian, late 17th century.
The man behind the masterpiece, Albrecht Altdorfer, was born in 1480 in Bavaria, either in Regensburg or the town of Altdorf. He lived and worked in Regensburg, on the Danube, and became a key member of the Danube School, a collection of painters, mostly living on the famed river, known for their landscapes. Some of his works are considered by some to be the first landscape paintings, in the modern sense. Aside from painting, he was an accomplished engraver and architect. He was a public servant for many years in Regensburg, serving as the town architect and a town councillor. He is said to be responsible for the city walls, among other works.
The painting hangs in the Alt Pinakothek musuem in Munich.
To view other entries into the War Paint Series , follow the link.
Further Reading
A blog with some details of the painting.   (all-art.org) [Note: you need to scroll down a bit to encounter the work, but it’s worth it]
A Short Note on Decisive Battles   (geopolicraticus)
Share this:
Twitter
Facebook
Google
Email
Like this:
Like Loading...
Related
This entry was posted in Age of Discovery , Ancient World , Art , Europe , Germany , Greece , War , War Paint Series and tagged Albrecht Altdorfer , Alexander the Great , Alt Pinakothek , Battle of Issus , Bavaria , Danube School , Darius III , Duke William IV , History , Macedonia , Munich , Persia , Persian Empire , Regensburg .
Bookmark the permalink .
Leave a comment
Post navigation
← Previous Next →
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
Notify me of new posts via email.
Home
About
Author
Podcasts I Recommend
Fab Five Series: C’mon People, Participate!!!
Tueday Short Series
1014: Year in Review
Follow Blog via Email
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Follow Yesterday Unhinged on WordPress.com
Yesterday Unhinged
Yesterday Unhinged
Recent Posts
Sailing west from Byzantium: Columbus and the fall of Constantinople.
Aaron Cripps’ Fab Five: A Childhood Favorite, a Specter, a Pope & More
War Paint (Part 9): Stormtroopers Advancing Under Gas
Aztec king Cuauhtémoc was executed today in 1525 by Hernán Cortés’s Spanish forces in what is now southern Campeche, Mexico. Now WE know em
Isabel of Portugal, Duchess of Burgundy
Search for:
Top Posts & Pages
Túpac Amaru: A Legacy of Rap and Revolution
Sharyn Eastaugh's Fab Five: An Inept Ruler, a Leper, Raymond of Tripoli, a Knight and a Ragged Hermit
On This Day in 1014: Sweyn Forkbeard, King of Denmark, Norway and England Dies
Robert Horvat's Fab Five : TE Lawrence, a PM, an Honest Man, Schindler & a Jedi
On This Day in 1014: Henry II Crowned Holy Roman Emperor
Lope de Aguirre: You Have to Earn the Nickname "El Loco"
That's No Beggar, That's Gaudí, or A Street Car Named Expire
Thuggee Life: The Most Murderous Cult
Belchite: A Truly Haunting Monument
War Paint (Part 3): Battle of Nagashino
Categories
Categories
Archives
Archives
Blog at WordPress.com. | The Dusk To Dawn Theme .
Follow
Follow “Yesterday Unhinged”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 437 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.
%d bloggers like this: