SEP
MAR
AUG
16
2015
2016
2017
4 captures
20 Sep 15 - 5 Aug 16
Close Help
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
Battle of Alexander at Issus
Work by Altdorfer
Contribute your ideas for this topic
Thank you for helping us expand this topic!
Simply begin typing or use the editing tools above to add to this article.
Once you are finished and click submit, your modifications will be sent to our editors for review.
Britannica does not currently have an article on this topic. Below are links to selected articles in which the topic is discussed.
discussed in biography
Albrecht Altdorfer
...of Christ and the martyrdom of St. Sebastian, are night scenes in which he exploited the possibilities of torch light, star light, or twilight with unusual brilliance. Altdorfer’s masterpiece, the “Battle of Alexander at Issus” (1529; Alte Pinakothek, Munich), is both a battle scene of incredible detail and a highly dramatic and expressive landscape.
FEATURED QUIZZES
Vocabulary Quiz
True or False
Spell It
See More Quizzes
MORE QUIZZES
Counting Beans
Shakespearean Plays: Fact or Fiction?
Native Foods: Fact or Fiction?
See More Quizzes
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
©2016 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
MLA style:
"Battle of Alexander at Issus". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016. Web. 16 Mär. 2016
<http://www.britannica.com/topic/Battle-of-Alexander-at-Issus>.
APA style:
Battle of Alexander at Issus. (2016). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/topic/Battle-of-Alexander-at-Issus
Harvard style:
Battle of Alexander at Issus. 2016. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Retrieved 16 März, 2016, from http://www.britannica.com/topic/Battle-of-Alexander-at-Issus
Chicago Manual of Style:
Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "Battle of Alexander at Issus", accessed März 16, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/topic/Battle-of-Alexander-at-Issus.
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Update
Link
Click anywhere inside the article to add text or insert superscripts, subscripts, and special characters.
You can also highlight a section and use the tools in this bar to modify existing content:
Add links to related Britannica articles!
You can double-click any word or highlight a word or phrase in the text below and then select an article from the search box.
Or, simply highlight a word or phrase in the article, then enter the article name or term you'd like to link to in the search box below, and select from the list of results.
Note: we do not allow links to external resources in editor.
Please click the Web sites link for this article to add citations for
external Web sites.
Editing Tools:
Tips for Editing
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles.
You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind:
Encyclopaedia Britannica articles are written in a neutral, objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
MEDIA FOR:
Battle of Alexander at Issus
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email. Try again later.
To
From
Subject
Comments
(Please limit to 900 characters)
Cancel
Or click Continue to submit anonymously:
Continue