JAN
MAR
Apr
16
2015
2016
2017
4 captures
13 Nov 15 - 19 Mar 16
Close Help
Sign In
Help
71
report
HubPages »
Arts and Design »
Painting
Renaissance Artists
Updated on January 7, 2012
THE RENAISSANCE
The Renaissance may have been sparked through ideas expressed in the 14th Century by the Italian author, Petrarch, regarding a desire to see a revival of classical learning.
Renaissance artists led the way to this emergence from the Dark Ages.
The Renaissance Era gave birth to modernity.
Italy played a leading role in art during the Renaissance.
We are going to take a brief look at famous Renaissance artists and Renaissance Era Art.
ROBERT CAMPIN
Robert Campin 1375-1444) was a common fellow from Tournai, Flanders, who became an extraordinary Renaissance artist.
The painting we shall view is the first to honor Joseph, the carpenter step-father of Jesus; and the first to show the interior of a home.
There is much symbolism here as the artist blends the physical world with the supernatural.
ROBERT CAMPIN "MERODE ALTARPIECE" 1430 (METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART, NEW YORK)
JAN VAN EYCK
Jan Van Eyck (1390-1441), long considered the father of oil painting, was also Flemish.
We will view one panel of the Ghent Altarpiece, on which he had the assistance of his brother Hubert, widely considered the masterpiece of early Flemish painting.
The scene is of an orderly, blissful Heaven above and a nightmarish, terrifying Hell below.
VAN EYCK "THE LAST JUDGMENT" 1425 (METROPOLITAN MUSEUM OF ART, NEW YORK)
ROGIER VAN DER WEYDEN
Rogier Van Der Weyden (1399-1464), also from Tournai, is an expressive, emotional painter of incredible precision—reminding one of sculpture—and rich colors.
He was eventually named the painter of the City of Brussels and would greatly influence later Renaissance artists.
The painting I will present is a spiritual account of pain, grief and tragedy.
ROGER VAN DER WEYDEN "DESCENT FROM THE CROSS" 1435 (PRADO, MADRID)
BOTTICELLI
Botticelli (1444-1510) was from Florence, Italy, and the favorite painter of the ruling family of that city-state, the Medici.
He was a highly stylized painter, with an emphasis on outline, whose voluptuous figures seem to float in space.
We will take a look at his most famous painting, which is an ethereal depiction of classical pagan mythology.
BOTTICELLI "THE BIRTH OF VENUS" 1480 (UFFIZI, FLORENCE)
LEONARDO DA VINCI
Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519) is the master artist of the High Renaissance, an era of graceful, harmonious grandeur.
The painting we will review is an altar panel created in Milan.
We will observe a mysterious, dreamlike warmth and tenderness in this poetic vision.
Our artist was the first to express this particular scene, which is based on legend.
LEONARDO DA VINCI "THE VIRGIN OF THE ROCKS" 1485 (LOUVRE, PARIS)
RAPHAEL
Raphael of Urbino, Italy (1483-1520) is known as an artist of effortless grace and style by art historians.
The painting we shall review is his masterpiece.
Its subject is famous Greek philosophers gathered around Plato and Aristotle; and all members are wonderfully portrayed in their roles.
We will note the great symmetrical precision, and emphasis on architecture.
RAPHAEL "THE SCHOOL OF ATHENS" 1511 (VATICAN, ROME)
GRUNEWALD
Matthias Grunewald (1470-1528) was a German artist, engineer and architect.
Only ten paintings of his paintings survive; and he has achieved fame just during the last 100 years.
We will focus on one part of the Isenheim Altarpiece—his largest and most famous work.
The artist shows an unprecedented range of color and movement for his day.
MATTHIAS GRUNEWALD "THE RESURRECTION" 1515 (MUSEE UNTERLINDEN, COLMAR, GERMANY)
TITIAN
Titian (1489-1576) is the most famous of the Venetian painters and an artist of inimitable skill, who could seemingly paint nearly any subject with wonderful clarity.
Veronese and El Greco served as apprentices to the master early in their careers.
The work we will view features a beautiful landscape and active, muscular figures; painted with polychromatic modulations.
TITIAN "BACCHANAL" 1518 (PRADO, MADRID)
ALTDORFER
Albrecht Altdorfer (1480-1538) was a pioneer of landscape art from Regensberg, Germany.
I will present his impressive painting labeled Alexander the Great's victory over Darius, King of Persia; which at the same time it is actually about the defeat of the Turks at the gates of Vienna in 1529.
It is unique in its birds-eye view in which the humans are nearly incidental.
ALBRECHT ALTDORFER "THE BATTLE OF ISSUS" 1529 (ALTE PINAKOTHEK, MUNICH)
HANS HOLBEIN
Han Holbein (1497-1543) was from Augsburg, Germany and is known as a master painter of the human image.
His father was also an accomplished artist.
After learning his craft in Switzerland, he lived most of his later life in England.
I will present a portrait that shows the artist's expression of divine authority in an absolute ruler.
HANS HOLBEIN THE YOUNGER "HENRY VIII" 1540 (NATIONAL GALLERY, ROME)
PETER BRUEGEL
Peter Bruegel (1527-1569) was a highly educated, artistic genius from The Netherlands, who was very interested in landscapes and the daily life and customs of humble peasants.
We will view what appears to be the first depiction of a winter scene in art.
Here we see the seasonal tasks of men and women in the annual cycle of birth and death.
PIETER BRUEGEL THE ELDER "THE RETURN OF THE HUNTERS" 1565 (KUNSTHISTORISCHES, VIENNA)
MICHELANGELO
Michelangelo (1475-1564) might be the greatest artist in the history of the world.
He seems to have possessed a supernatural genius of divine inspiration.
We will take a look at his painting in the Sistine Chapel, in which we see the blessed and the damned pleading for mercy before God.
Note that the artist used his own face on the flayed skin of St. Bartholomew.
MICHELANGELO "THE LAST JUDGMENT" 1541 (VATICAN, ROME)
RENAISSANCE ARTISTS
I have previously published many Hubs about Art such as:
The Art of Rembrandt
Photographic Art
More in this Series
76
Painting
Baroque
Baroque Art is a term that describes the art of the 17th Century.
In this article, we look at paintings and bios of the Baroque Period, including Caravaggio, Rubens, Vermeer,  Velazquez, and others.
87
Photography
Photographic Art
This is a collection of some of my favorite Photographic Art, featuring a dozen pictures; one each by Dorothea Lange, Edward Weston, Robert Capa, Alfred Eisenstaedt, Gordon Parks, Ansel Adams, Joe Rosenthal, Wayne...
Recommended Hubs
Comments 71 comments
Go to last comment
Paraglider 6 years ago  from Kyle, Scotland
Level 1 Commenter
Hi James - that's a good representative collection, quite a few of which I've been privileged to see 'live'.
But Grunewald is a new name for me.
It's good to learn more.
As an aside, I played the part of Hans Holbein in a primary school play about Anne of Cleves (Henry's wife no 4, I think).
I was 9 years old at the time.
Memories...
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Paraglider— Thank you for being my first visitor.
I find it amazing that you played Hans in a school play.
I didn't know he was THAT well known.
I always enjoy hearing from from you, my erudite friend.
dohn121 6 years ago  from Hudson Valley, New York
I have not heard of some of the amazing artists of the Renaissance Period, but am no enamored by their work.
Thanks, James for sharing such an extraordinary masterpiece :D
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
dohn121— You are welcome, kind sir.
It is my pleasure to share these masterworks of art.
Thank you for checking out my gallery and leaving your comments.
Ciao
Hello, hello, 6 years ago  from London, UK
This was a real joy to read about these painters and there masterpieces.
Thank you so much to put it together.
jill of alltrades 6 years ago  from Philippines
Your knowledge about art and art history is really amazing!
I like this collection because I highly admire most of them.
Thank you very much for sharing!
Wild cherry 6 years ago
Great hub!!
What I would also like to see is some paintings of Dürer.
Again, great hub!
:)
ethel smith 6 years ago  from Kingston-Upon-Hull
Ithink my favourite is Bruegel, although they were all so talented
paulgc 6 years ago
Thanks james, my favourite has always been the Birth Of Venus after watching a documentary about painting a while ago.
Good work.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Hello, hello,— You are most welcome.
Thank you so much for taking the time to come by and review my article.
I'm so glad you enjoyed it.
:-)
Tom Whitworth 6 years ago  from Moundsville, WV
Level 1 Commenter
James,
Thank you for the beautiful paintings and your insightful commentary.
I think Da Vinci may have been the first example of a man for all seasons.
His art, philosphy, and contributions to science were ahead of his time.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
jill of alltrades— Hello, my artistic friend!
You are welcome.
Thank you very much for your kind compliments.
I know you know beauty when you see it!
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Wild Cherry— I did review my favorite Durer in this Hub:
http://hubpages.com/art/Renaissance-Paintings
Thank you much for your kind compliments.
Welcome to HubPages!
Scott.Life 6 years ago
What a great collection of art, this was like a walk down memory lane and art history.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
ethel smith— That Bruegel stands out from the others, doesn't it?
It has sort of a modern look about it.
And he's keeping it real.
:)
Thanks for chiming in.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
paulgc— You are welcome.
The Botticelli is surely a masterpiece.
I'm well pleased that you came by and let me know you enjoyed these works of art.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Tom Whitworth— You are surely welcome, my friend.
Leonardo may have been the most brilliant person ever.
And there have been quite a few.
:)  I also love this particular painting.
Thanks!
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Scott.Life— Thank you so much, my friend.
How glad I am that you enjoyed it.
I appreciate you for letting me know.
itakins 6 years ago  from Irl
Beautiful Sunday morning hub.I love Bruegel's 'The Return Of The Hunters'.
Great work ,James.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
itakins— Good morning!
That is a special work of art, to be sure.
Thank you for letting me know you enjoyed it.
:)
Tammy Lochmann 6 years ago
I like this.
I have seen a few Ranaissance works.
I have been to Germany and visted the many Cathedrals and Castles there.
I have been to the New York Metropolitan Museum of Art and a few others that I can't really recall right now.
Thanks!
Tammy (there must not have been enough room for  the other part to the Jan Van Eyck work)
"Quill" 6 years ago
A true artist is one that can display the subject through his heart and his work.
The old masters we see here were able to inspire to this day as you have shown in your hub James.
Very well done, an ispiration and a valuable lesson in the works of these humble artists and the lasting footprint they have left behind.
Blessings
smarleygrl7 6 years ago
I think it is amazing what people can paint.
I am an artist of sorts, but not oil paintings or anything near as magnificent as these renissance artists!
I think an artist is much like a great poetry writer their true character is reflected with every stroke of their brush as a writer and his pencil.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Tammy Lochman— Come to think of it, there was room for the entire Van Eyck triptych.
I think I wanted to send a certain message with just this section of it.
:D
I love visiting museums.
I love art.
I can't imagine having the skills to produce such works, though.
I can't draw a good stick figure.
:0
Thanks for coming by and leaving your comments.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
"Quill"— I love your definition of a true artist.
Your comments are inspiring in themselves.
Thank you for your wise words.
I appreciate the visitation.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
smarleygrl7— I am amazed by great painters (and sculptors).
I am curious what type of art you produce.
Nice description of an artist you provided.
Thank you for that and for visiting.
:)
Welcome to the Hub Pages Community.
ArchDynamics 6 years ago  from Orlando, FL
King James:
Another delightful Hub.
I’ve always been a fan of Raphael luminescent style.
The ‘School of Athens’ was commissioned at the same time he was instructed to paint the ‘Disputa’, portraying the secular sciences of philosophy.
Fun facts about the painting:
Aristotle and Plato can be seen walking in conversation in the center engaged in scholarly discourse.
Aristotle (in red-orange) is symbolically pointing upward, indicating the source of his ideas is heavenward, his source of divine inspiration.
Plato (in blue), conversely, is pointing downward, indicating the starting point of the natural sciences.
Raphael, as did many other artists, also incorporates a number of his contemporaries into this fresco.
His Plato is believed to be a portrait of Leonardo, with Archimedes (bald head, lower right, drawing on a slate tablet with a pair of dividers), may be recognized as Bramante.
Raphael also looks out towards the viewer (white with cap) from beside the pillar at the extreme right-hand edge of the picture.
Knowing a bit more about the 'back-story' always makes this more fun.
IMHO.
Tammy Lochmann 6 years ago
I thought so :)  -Tammy
Pamela99 6 years ago  from United States
Level 1 Commenter
James, I so enjoyed your beautiful display art and your comments as well.
The Atlanta High Museum of Art has a  Leonardo de Vinci's exhibition at the present time.
I am traveling there next weekend and hoping I have time to visit.
I too love Raphael's work.
Very nice hub.
Kebennett1 6 years ago  from San Bernardino County, California
James, you always pick a wonderful, diverse collection of masterpiece artwork.
ROBERT CAMPIN's "MERODE ALTARPIECE" is a magnificent piece.
It offers such wonderful lines and dimensions as well as beauty.
BOTTICELLI's "THE BIRTH OF VENUS" offers a Statuesque Venus with such movement around her.
HANS HOLBEIN's THE YOUNGER "HENRY VIII" is a handsome presentation of Renaissance expressionism.
They are my favorite pieces in this collection.
Thank you as always for your artist prowess.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
ArchDynamics— Thank you, brother.
I sincerely appreciate that filled in the backstory for my readers.
You are a good man.
And your analysis is spot on, as always.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Tammy Lochmann— You thought right, missy!
Thanks for coming back.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Pamela99— I'm so glad you enjoyed it.
If Leonardo was being exhibited here, I wouldn't miss it for the world.
You are lucky and you should go.
Thank you for your nice comments.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Kebennett1— It is always nice to read your comments.
Thanks for pointing out your favorites and why they are the same.
You are surely welcome, dear.
dusanotes 6 years ago  from Windermere, FL
Very nice Hub, James.
You never disappoint.
Of all the painters, the one - or the work - I enjoyed most was the Returning Hunter scene by Peter Bruegel.
I know, Michelangelo's famous paintings are fantastic in scope and perhaps in meaning, too, but right now - and I think we as an audience change our degrees of enjoyment from time to time - I appreciate still-life scenes most.
Good work.
Don White
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
dusanotes— Thank you, Don.
You are right in that our tastes evolve.
I didn't appreciate master painters when I was young.
All I cared about in the Arts was music.
So, this represents growth for me.
I like the Bruegel, too.
It is an interesting piece.
Very different.
Thanks for coming by, my friend.
GPAGE 6 years ago  from California
James!
Thank you for this wonderful and informative hub!
The work here is so beautiful that it would be impossible to pick a favorite!
"The Last Judgement" is stunning and stands out to me the most.....a bit intense I guess!
ha
I always learn a lot from your hubs!
Best, G
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
GPAGE— Well, hello there.
You are welcome.
I saved the "Last Judgment" for last as the climax of the piece.
I'm glad you enjoyed it.
Thanks for coming.
GPAGE 6 years ago  from California
James!
I meant "The Last Judgement" 1425 by Van Eyck!
I like the last one too!
; Best, G
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
GPAGE— Oh!
My goof.
I forgot I had two of those in there.
That Van Eyck is kinda scary.
That's why I like it.
It was meant to scare the bejesus out of those folks in the Middle Ages who hadn't seen horror movies yet.
:D
Duchess OBlunt 6 years ago
My education in the arts is sadly lacking.
One of the reasons I so enjoy your Hubs on art.
Thanks James.
RTalloni 6 years ago  from the short journey
Level 6 Commenter
Thanks for putting this together so well with such nice photos of the paintings.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Duchess OBlunt— It is a joy to hear from you again, Duchess.
I am pleased that you have expressed your enjoyment.
Thank you!
And you're welcome, too.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
RTalloni— You're most welcome.
Thank you for reviewing my gallery.
I do appreciate it.
Hxprof 6 years ago  from Clearwater, Florida
Level 1 Commenter
James, have made two attempts to email you.
Not seeing 'sent' result for either.
Did you receive?
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Hxprof— Yes, I did receive.
I haven't studied them yet but I will soon.
Thank you very much for them.
Peggy W 6 years ago  from Houston, Texas
Level 6 Commenter
We saw a couple of these in the Prado.
You always choose good examples to portray the various artist's works.
Most enjoyable hub.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Peggy W— You did a hub about the Prado, didn't you?
Thanks for the compliments.
knell63 6 years ago  from Umbria, Italy
Hi James, a good representative spread of painters there.
A little for all to enjoy.
you have to love the intensity of the colours the managed to get even back then.
Enjoyed reading it.
knell63 6 years ago  from Umbria, Italy
Hi James, a good representative spread of painters there.
A little for all to enjoy.
you have to love the intensity of the colours the managed to get even back then.
Enjoyed reading it.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
knell63— Nice to hear from you again.
Thank you for your compliments.
They surely did have expressive colors and not the advantages of modern paints.
I'm pleased that you enjoyed this and I appreciate the visit.
creativeone59 6 years ago  from Gold Canyon, Arizona
Thank you for a very enlightening hub of the Renaissance artist, I enjoyed them thank yo for sharing them.
Godspeed.
creativeone59
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
creativeone59— You are welcome.
I am pleased that you enjoyed this gallery.
Thanks for coming!
dara 6 years ago
Hello, I apologize for not visiting this Hub earlier.
These are all incredibly moving paintings and I love all these too.
Your hubs of art are truly beautiful.
I have not looked at these artist for quite some time and never viewed the originals of these paintings.
Although I have seen paintings that just made me cry because of their beauty and spiritual impact.
It would be lovely to have that experience again.
I also feel like a flake not getting back to you about your offer to help me with a Hub for my paintings(not that I am comparing my stuff to these Masters).
It just seems like an appropriate time to mention that I would be honored.
I have been working on my most recent statement and  feel I am getting close to raping it up.
I think this would be helpful.
dara 6 years ago
That Jan Van Eyck painting is very disturbing and very effective in scaring people...don't you think?
Definitely my least favorite.
I do not see death this way.
I see death more like an acid trip I experienced at a frighteningly early age when I lived in Florida Death for me will be a sense of release of all  physical being and a feeling of oneness with the Creator of life itself.
A oneness that can not be described(at least I can not in my present being).
But, it is something that is known when one dies.
I am not afraid of death.
Jan Van Eyck is kind of like a really scary movie...thrilling... not unlike our own fears that have been instilled in us throughout generations.
I feel for Jan Van because, my guess is, he did not get much sleep.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
dara— Hey!
I'm glad you made it, kid.
No apology necessary.
I'll always be here waiting when you get the time to come by.
I have seen five of these in person, those in New York, Paris and the Vatican.
They are far more impressive when the actual painting is right there in front of you.
It's great that you would like me to exhibit your work on HubPages.
How many pieces of art would you like to show?
Thanks for coming and for your compliments.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
dara— It surely has some sort of message.
:)
You're funny.
He didn't get much sleep, huh?
I hope your version of death is the true one.
It sounds nice.
I'll quote Woody Allen: "I don't mind dying.
I just don't want to be there when it happens."
dara 6 years ago
I do say the craziest things some time.
I was just thinking if I had to paint hell or whatever I would have nightmares.
James you are always so gracious it is no wonder that you are popular.
I like that quote.
Talk to ya later.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
dara— I am always happy to see your name in my inbox.
Thank you for maintaining our friendship.
blaise25 6 years ago  from close to you...
Renaissance has always been so interesting for me.
thanks for sharing!
;p
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
blaise25— Why, thank you for coming by and leaving your remarks.
You are welcome.
I enjoyed your poetry, too.
stars439 6 years ago  from Louisiana, The Magnolia and Pelican State.
Level 2 Commenter
The art and the details in your words are astounding and a pleasurable experience to savor .
God Bless You.
James A Watkins 6 years ago  from Chicago
Author
stars439---  Thank you for the accolades.
You surely know how to make a man feel good about his work.
I'll be coming over to read several of your Hubs soon.
Zj 5 years ago
You are all losers.
Get a life and a girl.
James A Watkins 5 years ago  from Chicago
Author
Zj— Thank you!
Thank you very much.
reversecharles 5 years ago  from Houston, Texas
I love Bruegel's work.
Great read!
James A Watkins 5 years ago  from Chicago
Author
reversecharles— Me too!
Thank you for your compliments.
Welcome to the Hub Pages Community!
anita vincent 5 years ago
ilove your paintings
James A Watkins 5 years ago  from Chicago
Author
anita vincent—  Thank you for saying so!
I am glad you do.
:)
stessily 4 years ago
James, Robert Campin's Annunciation Triptych is one of my favorites; I always have such a sense of tenderness in it.
I've loved Botticelli's "Birth of Venus" forever!
Venus' face reminds me of my paternal grandmother, my beloved Grandma Rose, also known as Grandma Blue Eyes, as my maternal grandmother, Laura, was affectionately referred to us by my mother as Grandma Brown Eyes.
The dream-like atmosphere of Leonardo's "Virgin on the Rocks" has also enchanted me forever.
He was such a master of subtle nuances.
My dear paternal Uncle Phil loved Pieter Bruegel the Elder and had a number of reproductions in his living room.
Thank you for this artistic journey which reminded me of painters who have colored my imagination with their paintings.
James A Watkins 4 years ago  from Chicago
Author
stessily— Oh, I agree with you about the Campin Triptych.
How beautiful it is!
So "Grandma Blues Eyes" resembles the Venus of Botticelli!
She must be some looker.
:-)
I am well pleased that you took the time to review this gallery of Renaissance Artists I assembled.
I love this art and this period of art in general.
Thank you for your insightful remarks.
And you are most welcome.
Sign in or sign up and post using a HubPages Network account.
0 of 8192 characters used
Post Comment
No HTML is allowed in comments, but URLs will be hyperlinked.
Comments are not for promoting your Hubs or other sites.
sending
James A Watkins 3,217 Followers
182 Hubs
MORE BY THIS AUTHOR
Define Socialism
Renaissance Paintings
Surrealism Art
Popular
EDITOR'S CHOICE
80
Acrylic Painting
Acrylic Painting for Beginners Step by Step
by Robie Benve
22
Acrylic Painting
5 Liquids That Can Remove Dried Acrylic Paint From Surfaces
by Jason
206
Painting
Top Ten subjects for art that sells
by John Dyhouse
Related
6
Famous Paintings
Fascinating Facts About Ten Famous Paintings
by aprilsemogan
0
Renaissance Art
All About Renaissance Art And Its Five Great Masters
by JLaszlo
EDITOR'S CHOICE
0
Famous Paintings
Rogier Van Der Weyden: Descent From The Cross
by Music-and-Art-45
28
Famous Artists
Raphael, a master Renaissance painter
by Suzette Walker
40
Drawing
The best drawings of animals by famous artists
by PeterStip
Click to Rate This Article
How good is this article?
Please rate this article using the scale below.
The scale is from 1 to 10, where 10 is the best and 1 is the worst.
Your Rating: ?
submit
About Us
Copyright
Copyright © 2016 HubPages Inc. and respective owners.
Other product and company names shown may be trademarks of their respective owners.
HubPages® is a registered Service Mark of HubPages, Inc.
HubPages and Hubbers (authors) may earn revenue on this page based on affiliate relationships and advertisements with partners including Amazon, eBay, Google, and others.
terms of use privacy policy (0.48 sec)
working