Feb
MAR
Apr
16
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
16 Mar 16 - 16 Mar 16
Close Help
for Teachers   for Schools   for Companies
Log In
Menu
Plans
Courses Courses
Find Courses by Subject
Find Courses by Subject
Science
Math
Business
Psychology
History
English
Social Science
Humanities
Spanish
ACT & SAT Test Prep
Teacher Certification
Professional Development
By Education Level
By Education Level
College
High School
Middle School
Browse All Courses
Explore Over
1000+
video courses
Browse All Courses
Credit Credit
Credit Options
Online College Credit
High School & GED
Certificates of Completion
How it Works
Earn Transferable Credit & Get your Degree fast
Learn More
Degrees Degrees
Find Degrees by Subject
Find Degrees by Subject
Agriculture
Architecture
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
Business
Communications and Journalism
Computer Sciences
Culinary Arts and Personal Services
Education
 
Engineering
Legal
Liberal Arts and Humanities
Mechanic and Repair Technologies
Medical and Health Professions
Physical Sciences
Psychology
Transportation and Distribution
Visual and Performing Arts
Find Degrees by Level
By Level
High School Diploma
Associates Degrees
Bachelor Degrees
Master Degrees
Online Degrees
Search All Degrees
Find a Degree that fits your Goals
Search Degrees
Schools Schools
Browse Schools by Degree Level
Browse Schools by Degree Level
Graduate Degrees
High School Diplomas
Certificate Programs
Post Degree Certificates
Undergraduate Degrees
Browse Schools
Browse Schools
Public Schools by State
University Video Reviews
Career Counseling & Job Center
Career Counseling & Job Center
Job Interviewing Tip Videos
Job Networking Videos
Résumé How To Videos
Job Search Tips
Career Videos
Career Research
Career Research
Researching Careers Videos
Glossary of Careers
Career Info by Degree
Job Outlook by Region
Degree & Career Research Articles
Create Account
Contact Support
Login
Sign Up
for Teachers   for Schools   for Companies
 Western Civilization I: Help and Review  /  History Courses
Course Navigator
Lucas Cranach the Elder: Biography & PaintingsNext Lesson 
Altdorfer's The Battle of Alexander at Issus: Subject & Style
Chapter 12 /  Lesson 22
Lesson
Quiz & Worksheet - The Battle of Alexander at Issus Quiz
Course
Watch short & fun videos Start Your Free Trial Today
Instructor: Joshua Wimmer
Joshua holds a master's degree in Latin and has taught a variety of Classical literature and language courses.
Like this lesson Share
You might have seen 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' before, but can you say what it really depicts? Learn more about Altdorfer's artistic agenda as we investigate his style and subject in what most consider his crowning masterpiece!
Naturally Stylish: The Style of Albrecht Altdorfer
When was the last time you found yourself captivated by a painting of the seashore or a photo of the Grand Canyon? Whenever it was, you should've probably thanked 16th-century painter Albrecht Altdorfer, seeing as how he was the first artist since antiquity to focus on landscape painting, or the depiction of natural settings in portraiture with an absence of human subjects.
Though he included humans in a number of his works, Altdorfer often found natural vistas to be much more compelling subjects in his art. And he wasn't alone in this opinion. Altdorfer himself is credited as one of the founding members, but there were also several others who became part of what's known as the 'Danube School' (German: Donauschule). Sometimes referred to as an 'Alpine Renaissance,' this early 16th-century artistic movement based along the Danube River combined Italian and native German influences and frequently featured examples of 'pure' landscapes favored by Altdorfer and his disciples.
Regensburg Landscape (ca. 1510)
Pieces such as his 'Regensburg Landscape' demonstrate that Altdorfer, in particular, had a fascination with the dense forests that surrounded his home, displaying them with deep hues and dark tones. However, we can start to see in the same painting that he was also drawn to large-scale depictions of natural views - and none get much larger than those in Altdorfer's masterpiece: 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus.' As we continue to discuss Altdorfer's most famous work, we'll uncover more specifics of his style at play in this grand piece.
Shifting Focus: Subject in Altdorfer's 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus'
The Battle of Alexander at Issus (1529)
Watch a television police drama and you'll probably notice a lot of quick cuts between cameras or among specific characters. Though not as dizzying as these dramatic camera angles can be, there are also shifts in focus as we examine the subject of 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' - from ancient clashes to contemporary conflicts and even their cosmic ramifications.
Clash of the Titans
Immediately from the title, we can identify the feuding armies depicted in the foreground as those belonging to two Titans of the ancient world: Alexander the Great and Darius III, king of Persia. However, without this title - which comes from the banner suspended above the battlefield - and tiny inscriptions on the leaders' gear, we would have no way of telling who these people were.
Detail of Darius III in a chariot bearing his name
The battle scene Altdorfer painted is supposed to illustrate Alexander's victory over Darius at Issus in 333 B.C., which was the turning point that led to the legendary general's complete conquest of Persia three years later. Be that as it may, the soldiers are equipped with 16th-century weapons and armor, and architecture visible in the background is from the same period. So, whom are we really looking at here, then?
Turkish Skirmish
When Altdorfer was first commissioned to paint 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' in 1528 by Wilhelm IV, Duke of Bavaria, their region of Europe was poised for attack from foreign invaders. To be exact, these forces belonged to Suleiman the Magnificent, Sultan of the Ottoman Empire, and Altdorfer used his masterpiece to draw parallels between his time and Alexander's. For Altdorfer, Alexander's victory at Issus - located in present-day Turkey - was the perfect subject to reflect the conflict between East and West in his own day.
Accordingly, he depicted Darius' Persians wearing turbans and other garb worn by the invading Turks of his own time, while Alexander's Macedonians are dressed in distinctly European armor. He also showed both sides engaged in contemporary battle formations rather than ancient ones. However, if we pull back from the battle itself, we see that it's not even necessarily the main focus of the entire piece.
Cosmic Landscape
We might think it strange that the masterpiece of a landscape painter like Altdorfer would involve human subjects at all. But if we take a look at the broader canvas of 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' we see that it's easy to lose sight of them amidst the epic landscape which surrounds them. In fact, 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' is one of the finest examples of a particular type of landscape painting known as 'world landscape' (German: 'Weltlandschaft'), which depicts enormous, panoramic views of the sky and Earth's surface and was favored by Altdorfer and others of the 'Danube School.'
Detail of Cyprus and the Nile River delta
×
Unlock Content
Over 10,000 lessons in all major subjects
Get FREE access for 5 days,
just create an account.
Start a FREE trial
No obligation, cancel anytime.
Want to learn more?
Select a subject to preview related courses:
Math
History
English
ACT/SAT
Science
Business
Psychology
AP
In Altdorfer's masterpiece, we find a massive amount of the world depicted. Looking south from Issus' position in Asia Minor (Turkey), we can see the island of Cyprus, as well as the Nile River delta and Sinai Peninsula in northern Egypt. Nevertheless, the dramatic peaks Altdorfer painted are reminiscent of the Alps, once again tying the ancient battle at Issus to contemporary conflicts between the Germans and Turks. Still, it's not just the land itself that should be noted for its large-scale splendor.
To get a full view of northern Egypt, Cyprus, and southern Turkey as depicted by Altdorfer, we actually have to rely on satellite images like this one!
One of the particulars of Altdorfer's style is that he liked to experiment with light. He loved to play with different sources of light and times of day, becoming one of the earliest painters known for portraying subjects in torchlight or at twilight. In 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus,' Altdorfer crafted one of his most spectacular lightshows, using the brilliance of the setting sun center-right to push back against the dark tones of the invading night at top-left. This cosmic battle is also reflective of the importance Altdorfer placed on this clash amongst Europeans and Turks - with the radiant sun in the west (Europe) winning out against the crescent moon, a Turkish symbol itself, in the east. And by the time Altdorfer finished his masterpiece in 1529, his hope for European victory had been made reality.
Lesson Summary
Finished in 1529, 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' is the masterpiece of German painter Albrecht Altdorfer, an artist widely known for reviving landscape painting, or the depiction of natural settings in portraiture with an absence of human subjects. He's also credited as one of the founding members of the early 16th-century artistic movement based along the Danube River that combined Italian and native German influences known as the 'Danube School'.
In name, 'The Battle of Alexander at Issus' depicts the victory of Alexander the Great over Darius III in 333 B.C., but in execution, it reflects conflicts between Europeans and Turks occurring in Altdorfer's own lifetime. The immensity of the 'world landscape', or a type of landscape painting depicting enormous, panoramic views of the sky and Earth's surface, that is Altdorfer's masterpiece demonstrates the cosmic importance of this conflict.
To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
Create your account
Register for a free trial
Are you a student or a teacher?
I am a student
I am a teacher
What is your educational goal?
 Back
Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 10 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In
 Back
Description
Summary:
Visit the Western Civilization I: Help and Review page to learn more.
Earning Credit
Earning College Credit
Did you know… We have over 49 college                     courses that prepare you to earn                     credit by exam that is accepted by over 2,000 colleges and universities. You can test out of the                     first two years of college and save thousands off your degree. Anyone can earn                     credit-by-exam regardless of age or education level.
To learn more, visit our Earning Credit Page
Transferring credit to the school of your choice
Not sure what college you want to attend yet? Study.com has thousands of articles about every                         imaginable degree, area of                         study                         and career path that can help you find the school that's right for you.
Research Schools, Degrees & Careers
Get the unbiased info you need to find the right school.
Browse Articles By Category
Browse an area of study or degree level.
Area of Study
Agriculture
Architecture
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
Business
Communications and Journalism
Computer Sciences
Culinary Arts and Personal Services
Education
Engineering
Legal
Liberal Arts and Humanities
Mechanic and Repair Technologies
Medical and Health Professions
Physical Sciences
Psychology
Transportation and Distribution
Visual and Performing Arts
Degree Level
High School Diploma
Associates Degrees
Bachelor Degrees
Master Degrees
Online Degrees
Recommended Articles
Related
Recently Updated
Popular
Top School in Sarasota, FL, for IT Degrees
Top School in Washington, DC, for IT Degrees
Top School in Tampa for an IT Degree
Top School in Lexington, KY, for an IT Degree
Top School in Baltimore for IT Degrees
Top School in Arlington, VA, for a Computer & IT Security Degree
Top School in Virginia Beach for IT Degrees
Top School in Columbia, SC, for IT Degrees
Top School in Newport News, VA, for an IT Degree
How Long Does IT Take To Get A PhD IN Nursing?
Fashion and Apparel Production Adult Education Overview
Sports Medicine Professions: Overview of Career Education Programs
Design Department Manager: Job Description and Duties
Architectural Products Sales Job Description and Requirements
Professional Painter Job Description Duties and Responsibilities
Online Film Degree
Careers in Animal Psychology Job Options and Requirements
Architecture Degrees
×
Course Navigator
 Back To Course
Western Civilization I: Help and Review
16 chapters | 293 lessons
1 - Prehistory: Help and Review
Go to Prehistory: Help and Review
2 - History of the Ancient Near East: Help and Review
Go to History of the Ancient Near East: Help and Review
3 - History of Ancient Greece: Help and Review
Go to History of Ancient Greece: Help and Review
4 - Hellenism and the Athenian Achievement: Help and Review
Go to Hellenism and the Athenian Achievement: Help and Review
5 - The Rise of the Roman Republic: Help and Review
Go to The Rise of the Roman Republic: Help and Review
6 - The Fall of the Roman Empire: Help and Review
Go to The Fall of the Roman Empire: Help and Review
7 - The Dark Ages: Help and Review
Go to The Dark Ages: Help and Review
8 - The Early Middle Ages: Help and Review
Go to The Early Middle Ages: Help and Review
9 - The Medieval Warm Period: Help and Review
Go to The Medieval Warm Period: Help and Review
10 - The High Middle Ages: Help and Review
Go to The High Middle Ages: Help and Review
11 - The Late Middle Ages: Help and Review
Go to The Late Middle Ages: Help and Review
12 - The Renaissance: Help and Review
The Renaissance Timeline: Events Overview 8:57
The Italian Renaissance and Italy's Transformation 7:47
Humanism in the Renaissance: Recognizing the Beauty of the Individual 8:13
Renaissance Art: Artists, Paintings, Sculptures & Architecture 7:36
The House of Medici: Rise and Fall of a Banking Family 11:37
The Birth of Parliament: Monarchs vs. the Aristocracy 8:52
The Renaissance Economy: The Rise of Banking 7:51
The Formation of Modern Nation States 7:55
The Renaissance Heresies of Wycliffe and Hus 9:45
The Northern Renaissance 12:15
Canterbury Tales by Geoffrey Chaucer 11:01
France and the Valois at the End of the 100 Years War 6:20
England's Wars of the Roses 12:39
England and the Tudors at the End of the Wars of the Roses 9:35
Leonardo Da Vinci: Biography 7:12
Reconquista and Spanish Inquisition 9:40
How the Compass Helped Columbus 9:33
How the Printing Press Changed the World 11:20
King Henry IV of France: Biography & History
Calling of Saint Matthew by Caravaggio: Analysis
Allegory of the Outbreak of War by Peter Paul Rubens
Altdorfer's The Battle of Alexander at Issus: Subject & Style
Next Lesson
Lucas Cranach the Elder: Biography & Paintings
Nicholaus Copernicus: Accomplishments, Facts & Theory 5:12
Edmund Spenser: Biography & Sonnets
Go to The Renaissance: Help and Review
13 - The Age of Exploration: Help and Review
Go to The Age of Exploration: Help and Review
14 - The Reformation: Help and Review
Go to The Reformation: Help and Review
15 - The Elizabethan Era: Help and Review
Go to The Elizabethan Era: Help and Review
16 - Colonialism in History: Help and Review
Go to Colonialism in History: Help and Review
Like this lesson Share
Explore our library of over 10,000 lessons
Search
Browse
Browse by subject
College Courses
Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses
High School Courses
AP
Common Core
GED
High School
See All High School Courses
Other Courses
College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses
Click "next lesson" whenever you finish a lesson and quiz. Got It
You now have full access to our lessons and courses. Watch the lesson now or keep exploring. Got It
You're 25% of the way through this course! Keep going at this rate,and you'll be done before you know it.
Follow Us:
Home | About Us | Careers | Teach for Us | FAQ | Contact Support
Terms of Use | Privacy Policy
© copyright 2003-                           2016 Study.com. All other trademarks and copyrights are         the property of their respective owners. All rights reserved.