Chicago Board of Trade Building
18 reviews
Brown Orange Pink Purple Lasalle/Van Buren 0.09 mi Blue Jackson-Blue 0.15 mi Red Jackson-Red 0.24 mi
Get directions
141 W Jackson Blvd, Chicago, IL 60604
Get directions
2 reviews
Tim R.
said "I attended a dinner seminar at Maggiano's with my sister while visiting. I did not know what to expect but my sister told me it would be worth our time. They spoke for about an hour and then the meal came…" read more
Ad
Ark Wealth Builders
11.9 Miles away from Chicago Board of Trade Building
Comprehensive financial planning, serving individuals and businesses. We are a boutique independent firm that provides a customized suite of products for our clients' needs. Offering: * Financial Plans * Insurance Products… read more
Recommended Reviews for Chicago Board of Trade Building
English (18)
Search reviews
Your trust is our top concern, so businesses can't pay to alter or remove their reviews. Learn more.
×
Stop following John S.
1/1/2016
The Chicago Board of Trade Building(CBOT) has always been my favorite building in downtown Chicago. The love of this building began well over 50 years ago. My Mother worked in this building and I would visit her with my Grandmother. We might go for lunch in the building or maybe even Berghoff's nearby. I also had the adventure of going up to the observatory (long closed) on top of the building. From the observatory one could look up and see Ceres, the godess of grain in all her steely glory. This building, sitting at the head of LaSalle Street, with the Federal Reserve Bank and Continental Bank Building flanking it's base is the quintessential Chicago scene. I think the CBOT Building is the best and most iconic building in Chicago. The Railroads, Stock Yards, Airports, and Commodities Trading really were the fuel that built this city. We've lost preeminence in all but one of those things. The CBOT represents that Chicago is still one of the great Cities of the world. This building personifies that position. I hope this building long outlasts me as it's demise would truly hurt myself and this city.
Was this review …?
Listed in These are a Few of My Favorite Things: Ultimate Edition
Gorgeous building.  Walking through it feels historical, because the CBOT IS a historical and exciting place.  If you're in the area and walking in between the buildings through what I call the "smoker's haven" you will run into lots of possibly grumpy, gruff, surly-looking men in awesome mesh jackets, the men known as traders and company (clerks etc) taking their smoke breaks.  If you listen in on a conversation or two you may just be appalled, disgusted or offended. Haha, I say, you have just witnessed a bit of what I like to call the "trader culture."  LOVE this place!
The restaurant downstairs is pretty cool too. Have lunch there!
Was this review …?
Listed in The Underground Lunch Spots of Chicago
Downtown fish sandwich lovers - the Legend of Broker's Inn
Years ago, before the new 10,000 CBOT floor was open, and the CBOT was only one building, there used to be a restaurant in the building just to the east.  It was called Broker's Inn.  
THE FISH SANDWICH - As a tradition, on Ash Wednesday and every Friday, Broker's Inn would serve "the fish sandwich".  The fish sandwich was a large yellow bun, served open-faced, with fried whitefish piled as high as the plate could hold before falling off.  The fish was light, tender on the inside, and crisp on the outside.  This was served with their famous tartar sauce and fresh wedges of lemon.  One person could never finish this sandwich if they ordered anything else.  This was all before the new floor was installed.  Now, with the Berghoff Restaurant's halibut fish sandwich gone, there was no one to service this brilliant tradition.  Until now.
LEGEND CONTINUES - In the cafeteria basement of the CBOT building, they serve this same sandwich there.  In fact, the cafeteria serves BOTH the whitefish AND the halibut sandwich.  The same tender fish recipes are served in the same fashion on REAL plates with the same results.  Fish perfection!
WHAT TO ORDER - Fish sandwich (whitefish or halibut), get the lemon wedges and the tartar sauce.  If you are REALLY starving, get a cup of clam chowder soup.  
WHEN CAN YOU GET IT - Wednesdays and Fridays ONLY.  This is IMPORTANT.
TO GO - I would normally get this in a to go container.  You aren't gonna finish it, and you might as well bring it back with you.
PRICE - This will set you back about $6 for the whitefish, $7 for the halibut, $3 for the soup (yep, the mostly water foodstuff).
CAVEATS - Get there by 11:40AM or you will be met with a BIG line, especially during Lent.
For lunch, during the week, for a fish lover, this is the best deal in the whole city.
Was this review …?
Stop following Nate W.
8/6/2008
First of all, the CBOT building is my favorite structure on the Chicago skyline (even though it is hardly the most prominent on the skyline, and often unseen from many angles). The art deco design on both the exterior and inside is amazing. Being on the trading floor and seeing the pits was the closest thing to a Metal concert without being at a Metal concert....and most certainly to mention witnessing a pillar of the U.S. economic foundation as it stands and the whole world trading before my eyes. It was a phenomenal experience and I'm looking forward to my next visit.
Was this review …?
Stop following alex h.
5/13/2008
All I gotta say is your visitors center blows! what the hell I walk my ass all the way from lakeshore and ontario for this 100 sq ft. piece of crap? I cant even look at the trading floor unless I'm someone associated with the business? Walking between the two buildings where all the traders have a smoke break was awesome really. It was like walking into a smoke filled crowded room without it being a room. This was retarded. I woulda better spent my time watching cnbc to see the trading floor than this.
Was this review …?