Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
EXCHANGE, CHICAGO, ILLINOIS, UNITED STATES
WRITTEN BY:
The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica
LAST UPDATED:
10-14-2015
Alternate Titles: Board of Trade of the City of Chicago, CBOT
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), in full Board of Trade of the City of Chicago, the first grain futures exchange in the United States, organized in Chicago in 1848. The Board of Trade began as a voluntary association of prominent Chicago grain merchants. By 1858 access to the trading floor, known as the “pit,” was limited to members with seats on the exchange, who traded either for their own accounts or for their clients. In 1859 the Board of Trade received a charter from the Illinois legislature and was given power to set quality controls. At first grain was sold by sample, but soon a system of inspection and grading was introduced to standardize the market and facilitate trading. The Board of Trade was eventually to become one of the largest of the world’s futures markets in terms of volume and value of business.
After more than a century of trading exclusively in agricultural products such as corn and wheat, the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) broadened its transactions to include financial contracts (1975), futures contracts (1982), and futures-options contracts (1997). In 1994 the open outcry method of trading (by which traders would literally shout their orders) started to be replaced by electronic trading systems. In 2005 the CBOT became a subsidiary of a new public corporation, CBOT Holdings, and in 2007 the corporation merged with Chicago Mercantile Exchange Holdings Inc., a financial futures exchange specializing in options, foreign currency futures, and interest rates. The new firm—officially known as CME Group Inc., a CME/Chicago Board of Trade Company—handled transactions in financial products, commodities, and alternative futures products such as weather and real estate. In 2015 the CME Group announced that it would close most of its trading pits for futures contracts later that year, replacing the era of open outcry trading—which had been the main method of trading futures contracts throughout CBOT’s history—with online trading systems.