MAR
JUN
OCT
6
2014
2016
2017
14 captures
12 Apr 08 - 10 Oct 16
Close Help
Home
News
Portfolio
Awards
About
People
Contact
The Chicago Board of Trade Building
Projects
860 - 880 Lake Shore Drive Apartments
Annie May Swift Hall
Bach House
Beth Sholom Synagogue
Chicago Board of Trade
Clarke House
Emmond House
Humboldt Park Stable and Receptory
IIT
IIT - Carr Memorial Chapel
IIT - Main Building
IIT - S. R. Crown Hall
Illinois Supreme Court
Lafayette Building
Marquette Building
Reliance Building
Robie House
Sullivan Center
Sullivan Center - Cast Iron Restoration
Sullivan Center - Cornice reconstruction
Sullivan Center - Haskell, Barker, and Atwater Buildings
The Rookery
Unity Temple
The Chicago Board of Trade Building
Historic photo of entry lobby
Historic photo of main lobby
Historic photo of main lobby
Main lobby restored, photo by Hedrich Blessing
Entry lobby restored, photo by Hedrich Blessing
Detail of restored nickel silver metalwork, photo by Hedrich Blessing
Restored stairwell, photo by Hedrich Blessing
Chicago Board of Trade
Located at the highly visible terminus of LaSalle   Street, the Chicago Board of Trade is considered to be one of the finest Art Deco style buildings in Chicago. Built in 1929 and designed by Holabird and Root, the building features a limestone exterior with the quintessential setbacks of the style and carved stone ornament. At the top of the 42-story tower is a pyramidal metal roof topped by an aluminum statue of Ceres, the Roman Goddess of agriculture. The interior features a series of dramatic lobbies with six varieties of marble, nickel silver metal trim and ornamental plaster. The main lobby is a three-story arcaded space with nickel silver storefronts, balconies, marble piers and walls and a luminous ceiling. All of the lobbies were illuminated by stylized fixtures with nickel silver frames and translucent glass. Due to its significance for architecture and its association with trading, the building is a National Historic Landmark and a City of Chicago Landmark.
Although the building has been well maintained since its construction and retains a high level of historic integrity, some insensitive alterations had been made to the lobbies and the building was in need of renovations and improved lighting. In 2004, Harboe Architects personnel, then working for McClier, began renovation efforts that would restore the Art Deco splendor of the lobbies, improve elevator operations and modernize various building systems. Challenges for the preservation team included recreating missing light fixtures and nickel silver metal features, integrating fire protection systems into the restored lobbies and highlighting the architecture with improved lighting. Historic documents and finish analysis were used to accurately restore the lobbies. The award winning project was completed in 2007 under the guidance of Austin/AECOM with Harboe Architects as Preservation Architect. Harboe Architects also provided project management services for the exterior restoration and Federal Tax Credit Program consulting.
Complete Project Information
Title
Chicago Board of Trade
Work Completed
Lobby restoration, Exterior rehabilitation
Date Completed
2006
Awards
City of Chicago Commission on Landmarks - 2007 Preservation Excellence Award
Friends of Downtown - 2008 Best Restoration Award
Client Chicago Board of Trade Building LocationChicago, Illinois Contractor Alps Construction (interior) & DIS Masonry (exterior) Lighting Design Schuler Shook Architect of Record Austin | AECOM Metalwork Custom Architectural Metals
Back to top
140 South Dearborn Suite 306  | Chicago, Illinois  | Request information | ph: (312) 977-0333 | fax: (312) 977-0334
Name:
Email:
Subject:
Message:
Incorrect please try again
Enter the words above:
Try a different image
Close