APR
JUN
AUG
6
2015
2016
2017
6 captures
5 Sep 15 - 1 Aug 16
Close Help
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
Exchange, Chicago, Illinois, United States
Written By:
The Editors of Encyclopædia Britannica
Last Updated:
10-14-2015
Alternate Titles: Board of Trade of the City of Chicago, CBOT
Related Topics
futures
Chicago
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)
Homicides in Chicago, 2012
Chicago 1950s overview
market
list of cities and towns in the United States
Illinois
commodity exchange
United States
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), in full Board of Trade of the City of Chicago,  the first grain futures exchange in the United States, organized in Chicago in 1848. The Board of Trade began as a voluntary association of prominent Chicago grain merchants. By 1858 access to the trading floor, known as the “pit,” was limited to members with seats on the exchange, who traded either for their own accounts or for their clients. In 1859 the Board of Trade received a charter from the Illinois legislature and was given power to set quality controls. At first grain was sold by sample, but soon a system of inspection and grading was introduced to standardize the market and facilitate trading. The Board of Trade was eventually to become one of the largest of the world’s futures markets in terms of volume and value of business.
zoom_in
Chicago Board of Trade Building.
Medioimages—Photodisc/Thinkstock
After more than a century of trading exclusively in agricultural products such as corn and wheat, the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) broadened its transactions to include financial contracts (1975), futures contracts (1982), and futures-options contracts (1997). In 1994 the open outcry method of trading (by which traders would literally shout their orders) started to be replaced by electronic trading systems. In 2005 the CBOT became a subsidiary of a new public corporation, CBOT Holdings, and in 2007 the corporation merged with Chicago Mercantile Exchange Holdings Inc., a financial futures exchange specializing in options, foreign currency futures, and interest rates. The new firm—officially known as CME Group Inc., a CME/Chicago Board of Trade Company—handled transactions in financial products, commodities, and alternative futures products such as weather and real estate. In 2015 the CME Group announced that it would close most of its trading pits for futures contracts later that year, replacing the era of open outcry trading—which had been the main method of trading futures contracts throughout CBOT’s history—with online trading systems.
zoom_in
Trading floor activity at the Chicago Board of Trade, 2007.
© Russell Gordon/drr.net
Feedback
Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your Feedback.
Additional Media
More about Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
5 References found in Britannica Articles
Assorted References
Boards of Trade   (in Board of Trade (commodity exchange) )
history of Chicago   (in Chicago (Illinois, United States): Finance and other services )
trading activities   (in futures: Important futures markets )     (in United States: Finance )     (in Illinois (state, United States): Finance )
External Links
Official Site of CBOT - CME Group
Article History
Keep Exploring Britannica
QUIZ: Chicago History: Fact or Fiction?
LIST: 10 Chicago Writers
QUIZ: World Organizations: Fact or Fiction?
LIST: The Perils of Industry: 10 Notable Accidents and Catastrophes
QUIZ: A Study of Writers
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
©2016 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
menu
Menu
Home
Stories
Quizzes
Galleries
Lists
Login
Join
search
Search
search
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
exchange, Chicago, Illinois, United States
collections
Media
print
Print
Print
Please select which sections you would like to print:
bookmark
Cite
Cite
Select citation style
MLA style:
"Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016. Web. 06 Jun. 2016
<http://www.britannica.com/topic/Chicago-Board-of-Trade>.
APA style:
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT). (2016). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/topic/Chicago-Board-of-Trade
Chicago Manual of Style:
Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)", accessed June 06, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/topic/Chicago-Board-of-Trade.
These citations are generated programmatically and may not match every citation style rule. Refer to the style manuals for more information.
share
Share
Share
chat
Feedback
Feedback
Corrections? Updates? Omissions? If you have any suggestions for improving this article, we’d like to hear from you.
If you would like to be credited as a contributor for any suggestions that our editors choose to implement, please leave your name and email address, or login . (Unfortunately, we may not be able to provide credit in all cases.)
Submit Feedback
Thank you for your feedback
Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article.
Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work!
search
close
MEDIA FOR:
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT)
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email. Try again later.
Email this page
Cancel
Send
×