CanLII - 1938 CanLII 1 (SCC)
unknown

CANNON J.—The first question referred to us by His Excellency the Governor General in Council is :
Is Bill No. 1 entitled "An Act Respecting the Taxa­tion of Banks" or any of the provisions thereof and in what particular or particulars or to what extent intra vires of the legislature of the province of Alberta?
This bill provides that every bank which transacts busi­ness in the province of Alberta shall annually pay to His Majesty for the use of the province, in addition to any tax payable pursuant to any other Act, the following taxes, namely:
(a) a tax of one-half of one per centum on the paid-up capital thereof;
(b) a tax of one per centum on the reserve fund and undivided profits thereof.
It is claimed :
1. That the tendency of the tax is that it shall be passed on and is in reality an attempt to impose a tax on the paid up capital and reserves and profits throughout Canada and abroad and, therefore, is not "direct taxation within the province" ;
2. The proposed taxation would destroy or nullify the status and capacity of the banks which are Dominion corporations;
3. Taxation of the character in question, if within provincial competence and adopted by all provinces would strike at the very solvency of the banks and their ability to return moneys deposited with them.
The extraordinary expansion given to the recognized power of the provinces to levy direct tax for local purposes since the decision of the Privy Council in Bank of Toronto v. Lambe[43], notably in Abbott v. City of Saint John[44] ; Caron v. The King[45] ; Forbes v. Attorney-General of Manitoba, confirmed by Privy Council[46] ; and also in Judges v. Attorney-General of Saskatchewan[47] must be be reviewed in order to decide the question.
In Bank of Toronto v. Lambe43, the Privy Council said at pp. 586-587:
Then it is suggested that the legislature may lay on taxes so heavy as to crush a bank out of existence, and so to nullify the power
[Page 137]
of parliament to erect banks. But their Lordships cannot conceive that when the Imperial Parliament conferred wide powers of local self-government on great countries such as Quebec, it intended to limit them on the speculation that they would be used in an injurious manner. People who are trusted with the great power of making laws for property and civil rights may well be trusted to levy taxes. There are obvious reasons for confining their power to direct taxes and licences, because the power of indirect taxation would be felt all over the Dominion. But whatever power falls within the legitimate meaning of classes 2 and 9, is, in their Lordships' judgment, what the Imperial Parliament intended to give; and to place a limit on it because the power may be used unwisely, as all powers may, would be an error, and would lead to insuperable difficulties, in the construction of the Federation Act.
Their Lordships have been invited to take a very wide range on this part of the case, .and to apply to the construction of the Federation Act the principles laid down for the United States by Chief Justice Marshall. Every one would gladly accept the guidance of that great judge in a parallel ease. But he was dealing with the constitution of the United States. Under that constitution, as their Lordships understand, each state may make laws for itself, uncontrolled by the federal power, and subject only to the limits placed by law on the range of subjects within its jurisdiction. In such a constitution Chief Justice Marshall found one of those limits at the point at which the action of the state legislature came into conflict with the power vested in Congress. The appellant invokes that principle to support the conclusion that the Federation Act must be so construed as to allow no power to the provincial legislatures under section 92, which may by possibility, and if exercised in some extravagant way, interfere with the objects of the Dominion in exercising their powers under section 91. It is quite impos­sible to argue from the one case to the other. Their Lordships have to construe the express words of an Act of Parliament which makes an elaborate distribution of the whole field of legislative authority between two legislative bodies, and at the same time provides for the federated provinces a carefully balanced constitution, under which no one of the parts can pass laws for itself except under the control of the whole acting through the Governor-General. And the question they have to answer is whether the one body or the other has power to make a given law. If they find that on the due construction of the Act a legislative power falls within section 92, it would be quite wrong of them to deny its existence because by some possibility it may be abused, or may limit the range which otherwise would be open to the Dominion parliament."
In the Forbes case[48], I urged that the whole question should be reconsidered and I gave some reasons why pro­vincial interference with the exclusive federal power of fix­ing the salaries of Dominion civil servants could not be upheld. I said, at page 75:
Can it be denied that, under existing, conditions in Canada since the war, the reduction of the salaries of Dominion employees in proportion to the needs of the provinces or municipalities, which in some cases are very great and are increasing alarmingly, would, if added to
[Page 138]
the reductions imposed by the Dominion Parliament, amount to con­fiscation of a substantial part thereof and would as a necessary consequence seriously impair the efficiency, morale and economic independence of the national service? It is a patent fact to anyone conversant with Canadian conditions, and any attempt by a Province to confiscate, even in part, the stipend fixed by Parliament, whatever name may be given to the operation, under whatever disguise it may be presented, is an unauthorized assumption of a power which is essentially national in its scope and operation and is expressly denied to the Province by the last phrase of section 91. The Dominion alone can fix the salaries; and once fixed, they cannot be changed or reduced by the Province. According to elementary common sense, without the necessity of recourse to learned legal distinctions or disquisitions, a salary minus a tax of 2, 5 or 10 per cent is a reduced salary pro tanto. Such reduction in the case of Dominion servants can be effected by Parliament only in the exercise of its exclusive jurisdiction under head (8) of 91. Now the respondent contends that the Act contemplates and contains such an interference.
The majority of this Court and the Judicial Committee refused to reconsider the conclusions reached about this power of taxation in the cases of Abbott v. City of Saint John[49] and Caron v. The King[50]. I quote the follow­ing from the judgment of My Lord the present Chief Justice[51] :
In. Abbott v. City of Saint John49, this Court had to consider the judgment of the very able judges who decided Leprohon v. City of Ottawa[52], and it may be worth while to devote a sentence or two to Leprohon's case52
The trial judge was Mr. Justice Moss52 (afterwards Chief Justice of Ontario). He proceeded upon principles which had been laid down in judgments of the Supreme Court of the United States, notably in the judgment of Marshall C.J. in McCulloch v. Maryland[53], the effect of which may be summed up in these words, quoted by Moss J. (4) from the judgment of Nelson J. in Buffington v. Day, 'reported sub nom. The Collector v. Day[54].
* * * there is no express constitutional prohibition upon the States against taxing the means or instrumentalities of the General Government; but it was held, and we agree properly held, to be prohibited by necessary implication, otherwise States might impose taxation to an extent that would impair, if not wholly defeat, the operations of the Federal authorities when acting in their appropriate sphere.'
Mr. Justice Moss himself proceeds:—
In. this case the central authority, in the exercise of its appropriate functions, appointed the plaintiff to a position of emolument. In the exercise of its proper powers it assigned to him a certain emolu­ment. This emolument the plaintiff is entitled to receive for the discharge of duties for which the Central Government is bound to
[Page 139]
provide. I do not find in the British North America Act that there is any express constitutional prohibition against the Local Legisla­tures taxing such a salary, but I think that upon the principles thus summarized in the case which I have just cited there is neces­sarily an implication that such power is not vested in the Local Legislature.
The learned judges in the Court of Appeal for Ontario base their conclusions upon the same grounds.
In Abbott v. City of Saint John[55], four of the five judges of this Court were clearly, of the view that this reasoning was not admissible for the purpose of determining the limits of the powers vested in the provinces by The British North America Act. Davies J. said (at p. 606) :—
Time and again the Judicial Committee have declined to give effect to this anticipatory argument or to assume to refuse to declare a power existed in the legislature of the province simply because its improvident exercise might bring it into conflict with an existing power of the Dominion.
At page 618, I observed,
* * * Leprohon v. The City of Ottawa[56] * * * was decided in 1877. Judicial opinion upon the construction of the British North America Act has swept a rather wide arc since that date; to men­tion a single instance only, it would not be a light task to reconcile the views upon which Leprohon v. The City of Ottawa56 pro­ceeded with the views expressed by the Judicial Committee in. the later ease of The Bank of Toronto v. Lambe[57]. Indeed, although Leprohon v. The City of Ottawa56 has not been expressly overruled, the grounds of it have been so thoroughly undermined by subsequent decisions of the Judicial Committee, that it can,—I speak, of course, with the highest respect for the eminent judges who took part in it,—no longer afford a guide to the interpretation of the British North America Act.
Abbott v. City of Saint John55 was approved in Caron v. The King[58] and both decisions are, of course, binding upon this Court.
In the same case of Forbes v. Attorney-General of Manitoba[59] Lord Macmillan, speaking for the Privy Council, answering the argument that if the provincial authorities can tax at 2 per­cent the salary which a federal employee receives from the Dominion to enable him to live in the province and discharge his duties there, they can tax his salary to such an extent as to render it impossible for him to live and perform his duties, says that a similar argument in terrorem was advanced and rejected in the case of Bank of Toronto v. Lambe[60] and adopts Lord Hobhouse's dictum that self-governing provinces who are entrusted with the great power of making laws for property and civil rights may well be trusted to levy taxes.
[Page 140]
I would also refer to the case of the Saskatchewan Judges v. Attorney-General of Saskatchewan[61], where the Privy Council reaffirmed, as applying to judges' salaries, the view already expounded in Attorney-General of Manitoba v. Forbes[62], above mentioned.
Prima facie, in view of the above decision, it would, therefore, seem that the assets of the banks cannot be protected by the courts against the alleged destroying power of provincial taxation any more than salaries of Dominion civil servants or the emoluments of His Majesty's judges.
Where the United States Supreme Court can exercise certain powers, the decisions above quoted seem to preclude this Court from doing the same, on account of the powers reserved to the central government under our constitution. The Privy Council has set no definite limit to the legislative competence of the provinces to levy direct taxation within the province in order to the raising of revenue for provincial purposes. If such power is used unwisely or extravagantly, against the best interest of the whole of Canada, the power of disallowance by the Governor-General in Council, or, as in this case, that of reservation by the Lieutenant-Governor, acting, presumably, according to his instructions from the central government, are the only means or safety valves provided in our " carefully balanced constitution," to see that " no one of the parts can pass laws for itself except under the control of the whole acting through the Governor-General."
It must be borne in mind, however, that in the two cases last cited the Attorney-General of Canada did not appear before the Court, did not interfere in any way to show that, in the opinion of the Federal Government, the interests of the Dominion as a body politic were at stake when the emoluments fixed by Parliament for the Judiciary or the civil service were reduced by provincial taxation. In the present reference, the Dominion takes a very strong stand and contends that this bill, linked with the two others, constitutes essential encroachment upon the exclusive powers of Parliament of legislating in relation to " banking, incorporation of banks and paper money" and is, therefore,
[Page 141]
ultra vires. Perhaps, under these altered circumstances, the Privy Council, if this matter is brought before Their Lordships, will reopen the question and reconsider the scope to be given to the decisions above quoted. They may even distinguish this reserved bill from the Quebec Act considered in Bank of Toronto v. Lambe[63].
As to the question whether the tax is taxation within the province, " any person found within the province may legally be taxed there if taxed directly," according to Bank of Toronto v. Lambe63, and also according to the same authority, " whether the method of assessing this tax is I sound or unsound, wise or unwise, is a point on which we have no opinion, and are not called on to form one, for, if it does not carry the taxation out of the Province, it is for the legislature and not for the courts of law to judge of its expediency."
For my part, although I always believed that the efficiency of essentially federal services, like banking, cannot be impaired by provincial legislation, I, at first, felt myself bound by these concurrent and recent decisions to say that the Alberta Legislature is competent to enact a statute in the terms of this bill. But, after perusing with great advantage the reasons of my Lord the Chief Justice, I reach the conclusion that the bill, despite its form, does not seek to raise revenue for provincial purposes but, in its true character, aims, by erecting a prohibitive barrier, to prevent the banks from conducting their legitimate business in Alberta. Such purpose and effect must be declared ultra vires of the legislature of Alberta, which cannot use its special powers as an indirect means of destroying powers given by the Parliament of Canada.
The answer to the first question must be in the negative.
II.
The second question in the order of reference is the following:
Is Bill No. 8, entitled An Act to Amend and Consolidate the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act, or any of the provisions thereof and in what particular or particulars or to what extent intra vires of the legislature of the province of Alberta?
[Page 142]
After a full study of the matter and as I was ready to write my opinion in answer to this question, I had the advantage of reading the careful analysis of the bill prepared by my brother Kerwin and his criticism of its differ­ent clauses. I find that I could add nothing useful to his reasons. I agree with him and his conclusions; and I would, therefore, answer Question 2 in the negative. This Bill, if it became law, would constitute an invasion by the province of Alberta of the Dominion's exclusive power, of regulating banks and banking.
III.
The third question put to us is the following:
Is Bill No. 9, entitled An Act to ensure the Publication of Accur­ate News and Information, or any of the provisions thereof and in what particular or particulars or to what extent intra vires of the legislature of the province of Alberta?
The order-in-council represents that it has been and is the avowed object of the present government of the province of Alberta to inaugurate in the said province a " new economic order " upon the principles or plan of the theory known as the "Social Credit"; and that the said government has since secured the enactment of several statutes more or less related to the policy of effectuating the said object. The preamble of the bill, which I will hereafter call the "Press bill" recites that it is
expedient and in the public interest that the newspapers published in the Province should furnish to the people of the Province statements made by the authority of the Government of the Province as to the true and exact objects of the policy of the Government and as to the hindrances to or difficulties in. achieving such objects to the end that the people may be informed with respect thereto.
Section 3 provides that any proprietor, editor, publisher or manager of any newspaper published in the province shall, when required to do so by the Chairman of the Board constituted by section 3 of the Alberta Social Credit Act, publish in that newspaper any statement furnished by the Chairman which has for its object the correction or amplification of any statement relating to any policy or activity of the government of the province published by that newspaper within the next preceding thirty-one days.
[Page 143]
And section 4 provides that the proprietor, etc., of any newspaper upon being required by the Chairman in writing shall within twenty-four hours after the delivery of the requirement
make a return in waiting setting out every source from which any information emanated, as to any statement contained in any issue of the newspaper published within sixty days of the making of the requirement and the names, addresses and occupations of all persons by whom such information was furnished to the newspaper and the name and address of the writer of any editorial, article or news item contained in any such issue of the newspaper.
Section 5 denies any action for libel on account of the publication of any statement pursuant to the Act.
Section 6 enacts that in the event of a proprietor, etc., of any newspaper being guilty of any contravention of any of the provisions of the Act, the Lieutenant-Governor-in-Council, upon a recommendation of the Chairman, may by order prohibit,
(a) the publication of such newspaper either for a definite time or until further order;
(b) the publication in any newspaper of anything written by any person specified in the order;
(c) the publication of any information emanating from any person or source specified in the order.
Section 7 provides for penalties for contraventions or defaults in complying with any requirement of the Act.
The policy referred to in the preamble of the Press bill regarding which the people of the province are to be informed from the government standpoint, is undoubtedly the Social Credit policy of the government. The adminis­tration of the bill is in the hands of the Chairman of the Social Credit Board who is given complete and discretionary power by the bill. " Social Credit," according to sec. 2 (b) of ,ch. 3, 1937, second session, of The Alberta Social Credit Amendment Act is
the power resulting from the belief inherent within society that its individual members in. association can gain the objectives they desire;
and the objectives in which the people of Alberta must have a firm and unshaken belief are the monetization of credit and the creation of a provincial medium of exchange instead of money to be used for the purposes of distributing to Albertans loans without interest, per capita dividends and discount rates to purchase goods from retailers. This free distribution would be based on the unused capacity of the industries and people of the province of Alberta
[Page 144]
to produce goods and services, which capacity remains unused on account of the lack or absence of purchasing power in the consumers in the province. The purchasing power would equal or absorb this hitherto unused capacity to produce goods and services by the issue of Treasury Credit certificates against a Credit Fund or Provincial credit account established by the Commission each year representing the monetary value of this "unused capacity" —which is also called " Alberta credit."
It seems obvious that this kind of credit cannot succeed unless every one should be induced to believe in it and help it along. The word " credit " comes from the latin: credere, to believe. It is, therefore, essential to control the sources of information of the people of Alberta, in order to keep them immune from any vacillation in their absolute faith in the plan of the government. The Social Credit doctrine must become, for the people of Alberta, a sort of religious dogma of which a free and uncontrolled discussion is not permissible. The bill aims to control any statement relating to any policy or activity of the government of the province and declares this object to be a matter of public interest. The bill does not regulate the relations of the newspapers' owners with private individual members of the public, but deals exclusively with expressions of opinion by the newspapers concerning government policies and activities. The pith and substance of the bill is to regulate the press of Alberta from the viewpoint of public policy by preventing the public from being misled or deceived as to any policy or activity of the Social Credit Government and by reducing any opposition to silence or bring upon it ridicule and public contempt.
I agree with the submission of the Attorney-General for Canada that this bill deals with the regulation of the press of Alberta, not from the viewpoint of private wrongs or civil injuries resulting from any alleged infringement or privation of civil rights which belong to individuals, con­sidered as individuals, but from the viewpoint of public wrongs or crimes, i.e., involving a violation of the public rights and duties to the whole community, considered as a community, in its social aggregate capacity.
Do the provisions of this bill, as alleged by the Attorney-General for Canada, invade the domain of criminal
[Page 145]
law and trench upon the exclusive legislative jurisdiction of the Dominion in this regard?
The object of an amendment of the criminal law, as a rule, is to deprive the citizen of the right to do that, apart from the amendment, he could lawfully do. Sections 130 to 136 of the Criminal Code deal with seditious words and seditious publications; and sect. 133 (a) reads as follows:—
No one shall be deemed to have a seditious intention only because he intends in good faith,—
(a) to show that His Majesty has been misled or mistaken in his measures; or
(b) to point out errors, or defects in the government or constitu­tion of the United Kingdom, or of any part of it, or of Canada or any province thereof, or in either House of Parliament of the United Kingdom or of Canada, or in any legislature, or in the administration of justice; or to excite His Majesty's subjects to attempt to procure, by lawful means, the alteration of any matter of state; or
(c) to point out, in order to their removal, matters which are pro­ducing or have a tendency to produce feelings of hatred and ill-will between different classes of His Majesty's subjects.
It appears that in England, at first, criticism of any gov­ernment policy was regarded as a crime involving severe penalties and punishable as such; but since the passing of Fox's Libel Act in 1792, the considerations now found in the above article of our criminal code that it is not criminal to point out errors in the Government of the country and to urge their removal by lawful means have been admitted as a valid defence in a trial for libel.
Now, it seems to me that the Alberta legislature by this retrograde Bill is attempting to revive the old theory of the crime of seditious libel by enacting penalties, confiscation of space in newspapers and prohibitions for actions which, after due consideration by the Dominion Parliament, have been declared innocuous and which, therefore, every citizen of Canada can do lawfully and without hindrance or fear of punishment. It is an attempt by the legislature to amend the Criminal Code in this respect and to deny the advantage of sect. 133 (a) to the Alberta newspaper pub­lishers.
Under the British system, which is ours, no political party can erect a prohibitory barrier to prevent the electors from getting information concerning the policy of the gov­ernment. Freedom of discussion is essential to enlighten public opinion in a democratic State; it cannot be curtailed without affecting the right of the people to be informed
[Page 146]
through sources independent of the government concerning matters of public interest. There must be an untrammelled publication of the news and political opinions of the political parties contending for ascendancy. As stated in the preamble of The British North America Act, our con­stitution is and will remain, unless radically changed, " similar in principle to that of the United Kingdom." At the time of Confederation, the United Kingdom was a democracy. Democracy cannot be maintained without its foundation: free public opinion and free discussion throughout the nation of all matters affecting the State within the limits set by the criminal code and the common law. Every inhabitant in Alberta is also a citizen of the Dominion. The province may deal with his property and civil rights of a local and private nature within the prov­ince; but the province cannot interfere with his status as a Canadian citizen and his fundamental right to express freely his untrammelled opinion about government policies and discuss matters of public concern. The mandatory and prohibitory provisions of the Press Bill are, in my opinion, ultra vires of the provincial legislature. They interfere with the free working of the political organization of the Dominion. They have a tendency to nullify the political rights of the inhabitants of Alberta, as citizens of Canada, and cannot be considered as dealing with matters purely private and local in that province. The federal parliament is the sole authority to curtail, if deemed ex­pedient and in the public interest, the freedom of the press in discussing public affairs and the equal rights in that respect of all citizens throughout the Dominion. These subjects were matters of criminal law before Confedera­tion, have been recognized by Parliament as criminal matters and have been expressly dealt with by the crim­inal code. No province has the power to reduce in that province the political rights of its citizens as compared with those enjoyed by the citizens of other provinces of Canada. Moreover, citizens outside the province of Alberta have a vital interest in having full information and comment, favourable and unfavourable, regarding the policy of the Alberta government and concerning events in that province which would, in the ordinary course, be the subject of Alberta newspapers' news items and articles.