NOV
MAR
AUG
11
2015
2016
2017
6 captures
8 Oct 15 - 4 Aug 16
Close Help
   
Home
History
History
Human Rights Activism
Human Rights Law
Gouzenko Affair
October Crisis
Resources
Archives
Readings
Historians
Lessons
External Resources
History
This section includes histories of of human rights events and issues,  as well as resources for further research.
Encyclopaedia
Main Events
Biographies
Social Movements
Archives
Resources
Readings
Historians
Lessons
External Resources
News
About
Research Projects
Books
Articles
Presentations
Community
Contact
Censorship
Home > Encyclopaedia > Main Events > Censorship
State-imposed censorship has manifested itself in many ways throughout Canadian history. Limits on speech were incorporated into the Criminal Code in relation to treason, sedition, blasphemous and defamatory libel, disruption of religious worship, hate propaganda, spreading false news, public mischief, obscenity, and indecency. In its more extreme form, censorship could be imposed through the War Measures Act and the Official Secrets Act to protect the integrity of the state. Provincial and municipal governments could also restrict gatherings, performances, exhibitions, demonstrations, public speaking, and displays of texts and pictures on billboards. Defamation laws limited a person’s ability to criticize others, and copyright laws regulated publications.
When censorship was imposed by the state, its agents could include police, customs officers, post office workers, censor boards, and public prosecutors. Police banned demonstrations, dispersed public gatherings, and arrested people on picket lines; customs officials seized films, books, and magazines at the border; the post office refused to forward obscene material; censor boards banned obscene films and regulated content; and prosecutors indicted people for speech offences. The federal customs bureau was a primary tool in the service of censorship, but no list of its proscribed titles was ever made publicly available, and thus we do not know the full scope of its banned literature. Censorship generally focused on two categories: depictions of behaviours that undermined public morals (mostly sexual material) and expressions of unpatriotic ideas. During both world wars, the state imposed severe limits on the publication of materials that could undermine the war effort, and in the early years of the Cold War, it censored institutions such as the National Film Board for perceived pro-communist sympathies.
Canada’s first, and perhaps most famous, legal case on free speech dates from 1937. In that year, the Alberta Social Credit government passed the Act to Ensure the Publication of Accurate News and Information , as part of a major legislative package to regulate the provincial economy. In effect, the law would have required newspapers to disclose their sources, name their writers, and print government-supplied “corrections” of any critical coverage. Papers that violated the law could be punished with a large fine and a ban on publishing restricted information. The Accurate News and Information Act was unquestionably the most blatant peacetime attempt to gag the press. In 1939, the Supreme Court of Canada found that the law was ultra vires (beyond) the powers of the Alberta government, ruling for the first time that provinces could not unilaterally restrict fundamental freedoms. Justice Lawrence Cannon accused the provincial government of imposing a doctrine that “must become, for the people of Alberta, a sort of religious dogma of which a free and uncontrolled discussion is not permissible.” [Alberta Press Bill, 1938] Writing one of Canada’s most cited legal decisions, Justice Lyman Duff argued that “even within its legal limits, it [public discussion] is liable to abuse and grave abuse, and such abuse is constantly exemplified before our eyes; but it is axiomatic that the practice of this right to free public discussion of public affairs, notwithstanding its incidental mischiefs, is the breath of life for parliamentary institutions.”
Such barefaced attempts to censor speech, however, have been rare in Canada. Restrictions on speech more commonly take the form of laws that regulate film and literature. In 1954, the Catholic Women’s League, women’s farm unions, and the University Women’s Club, in conjunction with the Alberta government, established an Advisory Board on Objectionable Publications. The board convinced the four main magazine wholesalers to submit to its decisions regarding the publication of unacceptable material. Within ten years, it had censored 168 magazines. In Ontario, a similar arrangement was reached between the provincial government and civic and religious organizations to form an Obscene Literature Committee in 1960 to censor published materials in the province. Distributors, who feared prosecution for carrying obscene material, welcomed the board as a way of avoiding expensive legal proceedings and submitted to its decisions; by 1964, the board had recommended the banning of 112 periodicals and 97 pocketbooks. Quebec was the only other province in Canada to possess a censor board for literature, and like its Alberta and Ontario counterparts, it was operated by private citizens who advised dealers with the support of the provincial government. Although the remaining provinces had no censor boards, informal censorship mechanisms existed there during the early 1960s. The attorneys general of Saskatchewan and New Brunswick had managed to ban twenty-eight books simply because they had been banned elsewhere. In Nova Scotia, a magazine publisher removed eighty publications following a threat by a popular gospel preacher, Perry Rockwood, to drag him to court. During the same period, Newfoundland banned twenty-three “girlie magazines” that had been seized from a drugstore, and Prince Edward Island removed eight magazines following a threat from home and school associations to take court action. At the time, only British Columbia had no plans to ban obscene books.
In 1962, the Supreme Court of Canada ( Brodie, Dansky, Rubin v. The Queen ) heard an appeal of a Montreal court’s decision to ban Lady Chatterley’s Lover, a novel by D.H. Lawrence. The case challenged the federal Criminal Code provisions on obscenity, and though it reached a confusing decision, with seven separate judgments, it nonetheless resulted in a partial liberalization of the contentious obscenity laws by allowing experts to testify on the merits of impugned literature.
During the 1960s, provincial film censors were far more prolific than those who dealt with literature. The degree of censorship varied considerably from province to province. By 1963, as Malcolm Dean notes in Censored! “the average serious film circulating in Canada would be classified Restricted with a few minor incisions in Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia. In Alberta, it would be ‘chopped to pieces’ or banned. Saskatchewan would badly cut the film. Manitoba would merely cut it. And the Maritimes would condemn it outright.” Every province sported its own film censorship board in the 1960s, although most changed the name to “classification” board. In theory, the boards concentrated on rating films, not on banning them, but in practice this approach worked equally well in keeping undesirable films out of the marketplace. In Censored! Dean writes, “Classification simply means that films deemed unacceptable must be re-submitted with further cuts until they can be approved by a provincial board. The difference between ‘classification’ and ‘censorship’ is simply that boards which classify films do not provide their own editing services for distributors.” Since film censors did most of their work in secret, they were not required to justify their decisions. Alberta’s censors insisted in 1959 on eliminating the word “floozie” from a movie titled Shadows, and they banned Marlon Brando’s 1953 classic The Wild One for being a “revolting, sadistic story of degeneration.” Alberta was the only province to ban Andy Warhol’s Frankenstein in 1974.
Chronology
1847: Customs Act
1892: Criminal Code (obscenity, sections 179 and 180 – later, section 163)
1959: Amendments to the Criminal Code introduce a new definition of obscenity
1962: Brodie, Dansky, Rubin v. The Queen , [1962] S.C.R. 681 (the Lady Chatterley’s Lover case)
1985: Luscher v. Deputy Minister , Revenue Canada, Customs and Excise, [1985] 1 F.C. 85
1992: R. v. Butler , [1992] 1 S.C.R. 452
 
See also Georgia Straight
Further Reading
Clément, Dominique. Canada’s Rights Revolution: Social Movements and Social Change, 1937-82 . Vancouver: UBC Press, 2008.
Dean, Malcolm. Censored! Only in Canada: The History of Film Censorship, the Scandal Off the Screen. Toronto: Virgo Press, 1981.
Petersen, Klaus, and Allan C. Hutchinson, eds. Interpreting Censorship in Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1999.
Powe, L.A. “The Georgia Straight and Freedom of Expression in Canada.” Canadian Bar Review 48, 2 (1970): 410-38.
Encyclopaedia
Main Events
1837-38 Rebellions
1867 Confederation
1896 Religious Freedom and Manitoba Schools Question
1914-18 First World War
1919 Winnipeg General Strike
1919 Section 98 and the Security State
1937 Padlock Act
1939-45 Second World War
1945 Japanese Canadians
1945-46 Gouzenko Affair
1953-59 The Supreme Court of Canada and Civil Liberties
1959 Newfoundland and the IWA
1960 Canadian Bill of Rights
1968 International Year for Human Rights
1969 Bylaw 3926 (Montreal)
1969 White Paper on Indian Policy
1970 October Crisis
1970 Royal Commission on the Status of Women
1971 Gastown Riot
1976 Montreal Olympics
1977 Task Force on Canadian Unity
1977 The G.A.T.E. Case
1981 Bathhouse Raids (Toronto)
Charter of Rights and Freedoms
Africville
Anti-Semitic Riots (Toronto)
Capital Punishment
Censorship
Corporal Punishment
Denominational Education in Newfoundland
Dresden and Racial Discrimination
Duplessis Orphans
Eugenics
Freedom of Information
Georgia Straight
Hutterites
Privacy
Restrictive Covenants
Spouse-in-the-House
Biographies
Eric Adams
J.S. Benning
Biswarup Bhattacharya
Alan Borovoy
Raymond Boyer
Sam Carr
J. R. Cartwright
Maurice Champagne
Agatha Chapman
J. L. Cohen
Shelagh Day
Maurice Duplessis
Gérald Fauteux
Harold Gerson
Igor Gouzenko
Israel Halperin
C. W. Harvison
Irving Himel
John Humphrey
Kalmen Kaplansky
R.L. Kellock
John Leopold
Gordon Lunan
Edward Mazerall
James C. McRuer
D. W. Mundell
Matt S. Nightingale
Alan Nunn May
Fred W. Poland
Reg Robson
Arthur Roebuck
Fred Rose
Kathleen Ruff
Frank Scott
David Shugar
Durnford Smith
Robert Taschereau
E. K. Williams
Kathleen Willsher
Emma Woikin
Social Movements
Association for Civil Liberties
Canadian Civil Liberties Union
Canadian Labour Defense League
Civil Liberties Association of Toronto
Civil Liberties Association of Winnipeg
Civil Rights Union
League for Democratic Rights
Montreal Civil Liberties Union
Ottawa Civil Liberties Association
Alberta
British Columbia
Case Study: British Columbia Civil Liberties Association
Manitoba
New Brunswick
Newfoundland
Nova Scotia
Ontario
Prince Edward Island
Quebec
Case Study: Ligue des droits et libertés
Saskatchewan
Case Study: Canadian Civil Liberties Association
Federation of Civil Liberties and Human Rights Associations
Canadian Human Rights Foundation
Jewish Labour Committee (1936-1980s)
National Committee on Human Rights
History
Human Rights Activism
Human Rights Law
Gouzenko Affair
October Crisis
Main Events
Biographies
Social Movements
Resources
Archives
Readings
Historians
Lessons
External Resources
About
Research Projects
Books
Articles
Presentations
Community
Latest Tweets
Tweets by @HistoryOfRights
Home Encyclopaedia Archives Resources News About Contact
© 2016 COPYRIGHT CLÉMENT CONSULTING. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.      DEPARTMENT OF SOCIOLOGY, UNIVERSITY OF ALBERTA