AUG
MAR
MAY
11
2014
2016
2017
7 captures
25 Nov 14 - 2 May 16
Close Help
Home
About Us
Collaborators
Benefactors
Subscribe
En Français
Latest News
This week in Canadian media history: Edmonton Journal begins publication
by Tamara Baluja · November 10, 2014
Illustration courtesy of Aeman Ansari
By Aeman Ansari, Reporter
The Edmonton Journal was founded on Nov. 11, 1903, by three local businessmen—John Macpherson, Arthur Moore and J.W. Cunningham—as a rival to the 23-year-old  Edmonton Bulletin , Alberta ‘s first newspaper.
The three newsmen produced the first edition of The Edmonton Journal at the back of the Shamrock Fruit Store with the mission to provide reliable and relevant news to city.
After taking issue with Alberta Premier  William Aberhart ‘s attempt to pass the  Accurate News and Information Act  in 1937,  the Journal became the first non-American newspaper to be honoured by the  Pulitzer Prize  committee.
The paper also received a plaque in 1938 for defending the  freedom of the press .
With research from the Edmonton Journal Digital Archives.
You may also like...
Nicolas Van Praet joins Globe as Montreal business reporter
24 Sep, 2014
Danelle Boivin named CTV Edmonton anchor
16 Sep, 2014
Chris Morin joins StarPhoenix
17 Sep, 2014
Follow:
Next story National study sheds light on journalists’ working conditions in the digital age
Previous story Pack journalism, and a timely lesson about social media
What’s new
Latest News
Opinion & Analysis
Recent Posts
Live blogs
Please visit J-Source’s main site at www.j-source.ca
2014 CJFE Gala: A Night to Honour Courageous Reporting
A shrinking world: The changing role of Canadian foreign correspondents
Globe public editor: The Globe exposed thalidomiders’ problems decades ago
More
Tweets
Tweets by @jsource
Facebook
J-Source
2 hours ago
In the video in question, taken in the early hours of May 7 at an airport hangar owned by accused killer Dellen Millard, a flame can be seen in the top right corner of the frame for a few seconds.
bit.ly/1QSk8Mw ... See MoreSee Less
Why the Hamilton Spectator is not posting a video shown to jurors at the Bosma trial | J-Source
j-source.
ca
CBC, CTV and the National Post posted a controversial video from the Bosma trial.
The Hamilton Spectator did not.
Here’s why.
J-Source
5 hours ago
"Some words and phrases will offend some readers.
Yesterday, it was a “pretty prime minister” and separately a “union boss.”
Months ago, it was “tuchuses.”
bit.ly/1RbNOts ... See MoreSee Less
Globe and Mail public editor: Vulgar?
Inoffensive?
It depends on how some words are used | J-Source
j-source.
ca
Adding a little colour and flair to stories may come at the expense of offending readers.
J-Source
24 hours ago
This spring, the Toronto Star will have a brand new look bit.ly/1XfOQCY ... See MoreSee Less
Toronto Star website gets overhauled with mobile in mind | J-Source
j-source.
ca
New site is in beta-testing phase and is expected to be fully rolled out in the spring.
J-Source
1 day ago
“There is a broken link between the City of Brampton and ethnic media.”
bit.ly/1Wc0nD6 ... See MoreSee Less
Ethnic media demand more from City of Brampton | J-Source
j-source.
ca
Despite an increase in outreach efforts, some members of Brampton’s ethnic media still feel disconnected from the City.
J-Source
2 days ago
The loss of the Northern Journal offers a lesson for journalists bit.ly/1XcEGTw ... See MoreSee Less
Death of a newspaper by a thousand cuts | J-Source
j-source.
ca
Two weeks ago staff at the Northern Journal were served notice the print edition could no longer be sustained.
View on Facebook
J-Source and ProjetJ are publications of the Canadian Journalism Project, a venture among post-secondary journalism schools and programs across Canada, led by Ryerson University, Université Laval and Carleton University and supported by a group of donors.
Connect with us
2014 All right reserved