Apr
MAY
Jun
21
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
21 May 16 - 21 May 16
Close Help
Erstellen Erkunden Lernen & Support
Loslegen
Anmelden
Preise
Loslegen
Anmelden
Meine Prezis Erkunden Lernen & Support
Produkt Unternehmen Karriere Support Community Kontakt Apps
English Español 한국어 日本語 Deutsch Português Français Magyar Italiano
×
Houston, wir haben ein Problem!
Hoppla. Eine Firewall blockiert den Zugriff auf Prezi-Inhalte. Lesen Sie diesen Artikel , um mehr darüber zu erfahren, oder kontaktieren Sie Ihren System-Administrator.
Einprägsam aus der Masse hervorstechen - mit Prezi,
der Geheimwaffe für filmreifes Präsentieren.
Heute starten
Loslegen
Was ist Prezi? Mehr erfahren
Lädt Präsentation...
Öffentlich & kopierbar
Kopieren Teilen Einbetten Liked Like
Fernpräsentation
Senden Sie den Link unten via E-Mail oder PN
Kopieren
Präsentieren Sie für Ihr Publikum
Fernpräsentation beginnen
Eingeladene Zuschauer werden Ihnen folgen, während Sie navigieren und präsentieren
Zu dieser Präsentation eingeladene Personen benötigen kein Prezi-Konto
Dieser Link verfällt 10 Minuten, nachdem Sie die Präsentation schließen
Maximal 30 Nutzer können Ihrer Präsentation folgen
Erfahren Sie in unserer Wissensdatenbank mehr über diese Funktion
Möchten Sie diese Prezi wirklich löschen?
Weder Sie, noch die Personen, mit denen Sie diese Prezi geteilt haben, können die Prezi dann wiederherstellen.
Löschen Abbrechen
Möchten Sie Ihre "Likes" auf Facebook sichtbar machen?
Verbinden Sie Ihr Facebook-Konto mit Prezi und lassen Sie Ihre "Likes" in Ihrer Chronik erscheinen.
Sie können dies jederzeit unter Einstellungen & Konto ändern.
Nein danke
Mit Facebook verbinden
The Convention of 1832 and 1833
Keine Beschreibung
von
Imad Khan
am 13. November 2013
Twittern
Kommentare (0)
Bitte anmelden , um Ihren Kommentar hinzuzufügen.
Missbrauch melden
Transkript von The Convention of 1832 and 1833
The Convention of 1832 and 1833
By: Imad Khan
The Convention of  1832
Texans Settlers followed the news of the Mexican Civil War with great interest, hoping Santa Anna Would Win because the Texan Settlers believed that a new Federalist government would respond to their needs.
On October 1, 1832, a convention was held to discuss their problems.
At any convention, delegates, or people chosen to speak for a group, would discuss issues and decide a course of action.
Meeting at San Felipe de Austin, these delegates chose Stephen F. Austin as their leader.
All these delegates wanted change in Texas
They demanded immigration from the U.S to continue.
They also wanted Texas to be a separate Mexican state because at the time Texas was part of a bigger state called Coahuila y Tejas
Ramon Musquiz, the governor of the Department of Texas, supported these concerns.
According to Mexican Law, The Convention of 1832 was not a legal meeting.
Because the delegates had not met legally, Ramon Musquiz refused to send their requests to the Mexican Government.
So The Convention of 1832 failed...
The Convention of 1833
Shortly after The Convention, Santa Anna won the civil war in Mexico and became president. The Federalists now held power.
News of this victory in Texas called to another convention. This convention took place on April 1, 1833.
The delegates in this convention were firmer than the first. This time they chose William H. Wharton as their leader.
The delegates this time asked for better mail service, improved defense against the Native American Raids, the right to use English in business and law, they again demanded an end to the ban against immigration, more money for better schooling, and they urged that Texas should be a separate Mexican State.
Even though William H. Wharton was the leader, Austin still took an active part in this convention.
David G. Burnet wrote about why the settlers wanted statehood.
He noted that Mexico's founders had combined Texas and  Coahuila into one state, and that Texas was to become its own state as soon as the population grew big enough.
"Texas suffered as a part of Coahuila y Tejas," said Burnet. The state government gave few services to the towns of Texas
The last part of The Convention of 1833 was to draft a constitution for Texas.
The special task of drafting a constitution for Texas was rested upon newcomer's Sam Houston's shoulders. "The Land of Promise" was what Sam Houston called Texas.
The convention's work was soon completed. The delegates took a strong stand in favor of Texas Statehood. They hoped Mexico City would welcome their ideas. All the Convention needed now was a messenger.
Stephen F. Austin set off for Mexico City, hoping to finish the business quickly, but was completely unaware of the trouble awaiting him.
Quiz
Who did the Texan settlers want to win the Mexican Civil War and why?
What are delegates?
Who was the leader of the convention of 1832?
Name 2 things the settlers demanded in the convention of 1832.
Who was the leader of the convention of 1833?
Who made the constitution for Texas and what did he call Texas?
Who was the messenger to go to Mexico City?
Komplettes Transkript
Weitere Präsentationen von Imad Khan
CHASING LINCOLN'S KILLER
Untitled Prezi
Chasing Lincoln
Weitere Prezis von diesem Autor
Beliebte Präsentationen
Weitere beliebte oder die neuesten Prezis ansehen
Produkt Unternehmen Karriere Support Community Kontakt Apps
English
español
한국어
日本語
Deutsch
Português
français
Magyar
italiano
© 2016 Prezi Inc.  Nutzungsbedingungen
<p>Verbinden Sie Ihr Facebook-Konto mit Prezi und veröffentlichen Sie in der Zukunft Ihre "Likes".</p><form class="bypass" method="post" action="/web/20160521172553/https://prezi.com/associate/facebook/"><input type='hidden' name='csrfmiddlewaretoken' value='SGqDkY2Ayfq2f8gUFLlznSldQJc2CiZw' /><input type="hidden" name="next" value="/cukde-bek7vl/og-like/"><p class="clearfix"><button type="submit" class="btn btn-primary" id="fb-connect-like-ok-btn">OK</button><a class="btn pull-right" onclick="closeOverlay();return false;" href="javascript:void(0);">Nein danke</a></p></form>