lauren c(83) says:
Really excellent adventure playground, theres a fenced off section for little ones with a slide, swings, a little playhouse and see saw. And for older children there are masses of equipment including climbing frames, curly slides, a big fortress wooden castle, an aerial slide, too much to name! The adventure playground's entrance is beautiful too - you walk over a bridge with a fast running stream underneath, (its very safe with fences!) and walk into woodland where the adventure playground is. There is also a little open-air train ride journey which costs £1 per child, and the adult will need to pay £1 too to ride with their child. It goes the length of the playground and back again. There are picnic benches all over the adventure playground to have lunch. Its a lovely place to visit. When you come out of the adventure playground, theres formal gardens behind the Belton House mansion, where there is a massive fountain and pond, and beyond that, a huge original green-house with lovely rare flowers in. The house is extremely interesting to visit, and they open the attics and basements on special dates throughout the year. There is also a coffee shop, ice cream stands, a restaurant, a second-hand bookshop, a shop that sells plants and gardening items. There are plenty of toilets, baby changing facilities, disabled toilets.Its such a big place, you can easily spend the entire day there and still not see everything! There is also a boating lake and woods to walk in.BRILLIANT!
Written by: Catherine D(8)
Catherine D(8) says:
Went here with my husband and two kids, aged 4 and 1 on a free weekend opening.  It was fantastic.  It isn't that far, only about 40 minutes tops from Oakham, just through Grantham town centre.  The adventure playground is the biggest I've seen, about 200m long and jammed packed full of things for every age of child (even a wooden fort!).  The house is stunning and so are the grounds.  Plenty of open space for kids to run riot, take a ball, picnic, bikes and spend the whole day there.  There is a cafe, restaurant, gift shop, plant shop and even a discovery learning centre for kids to colour, read, make etc.  Check the website for opening times and costs (quite expensive but you can just do the grounds).
Written by: Joanne M(467)