Belton House (NT), Grantham, Lincs

The perfect English country house?
Built for Sir John Brownlow in the 1680s, Belton House has all the design features of a classic English country home. Sitting in formal Italian and Dutch gardens and an historic 1300 acre deer park, Belton is often cited as the quintessential country house estate.
The estate also includes a restaurant, café and indoor play area, gift and garden shops and the recently restored outdoor adventure playground (opens 31 March).
Belton Remembers
One hundred years ago, the tranquil and scenic parkland of the Belton estate was a very different place. Lord Brownlow had given over a huge area of the park for the war effort and, in 1915, it became ‘home’ to tens of thousands of soldiers from the Machine Gun Corps. In 2015 Belton remembers this vital and fascinating part of its history.
Come and explore the impact that the presence of the camp had on the estate, and discover stories of people who prepared for war in such a stately setting.
There will be exhibitions in the mansion and stables throughout the year as well as events to mark the centenary such as living history, a garden fête, walks and talks.

Adult £14.50 (inc gift aid) House & Grounds
NT members free
House open from 12.30pm
Tea rooms :)

CARAL

Anyone travelling from Wellingborough who can offer me a lift please? Had surgery on my left shoulder and distance driving not possible yet. Glad to contribute to petrol costs.

6. März
Steph

Can anyone pick me up from Bromham ?

21. Januar
denise

Hi steph if you still need lift happy to offer and split cist of petrol/parking let me know

5. März
manjit j.

 Happy to pay towards petrol costs of
course!

28. Februar
denise

Hi manjit just checked and see you've made plans now. See you up there hopefully

5. März
manjit j.

Jo I don't think we have met but if you
would consider me for the b and b that
would be lovely, I don't drive so would
need a lift if you want to call me [masked] I can't private message
as the site is playing up,

28. Februar
Jo S.

Hi Manjit - I think we met at Anglesey Abbey? Very happy for you to join me at the b&b. The 2 places I want to visit on Saturday would cost £15 total (unless you are NT member), b&b is £35, dinner at the pub/b&b Sat night would be £12-£30. Happy to pick you up from Bedford 9am Saturday 2nd. B&B is a cottage adjoining a pub which has 2 double bedrooms. Jo

5. März
denise

Happy to give someone a lift if they're happy to get into town and help towards petrol.

29. Februar
manjit j.


Happy to contribute towards petrol
costs of course

28. Februar
Corinna

Anyone from MK planning to go? Let's car share!!!

20. Januar
Fozia

Hi, I'm going from Milton Keynes. Would be great to car share

24. Februar
Corinna

will pm you

24. Februar
Jo S.

Thinking of making a weekend of it and going up Saturday to visit other NT places (Southwell Workhouse & Tattershall Castle). Have found a lovely 2 bed cottage to stay in which is only £35 pppn b&b. Anyone care to join me (ideally female and someone I've already met!!). The cottage is 30min from Belton House.

22. Februar
manjit j.

Can anyone offer a lift from Bedford please?

12. Februar
dee

hi is everyone making there own way there or is there a coach. thankyou

19. Januar
Annabelle

Hello Dee, we usually manage to arrange transport amongst ourselves - post where you are coming from if you need a lift or if you can offer one. Thank you :)

19. Januar