JAN
MAR
AUG
19
2014
2016
2017
17 captures
25 Aug 10 - 14 Sep 16
Close Help
Austenonly
Jane Austen's life, times and works explained and discussed
Home
About and Contents
The Library
Jane Austen’s Film and TV Adaptation Locations
Jane Austen’s Works
Jane Austen and Bath
Jane Austen and Christmas
Jane Austen and Fashion
Jane Austen and Food
Jane Austen and London
Jane Austen and Medical Matters
Jane Austen’s Particular Places
Jane Austen and the Law
Jane Austen’s People
Jane Austen and Servants
Jane Austen and the Theatre
Subscribe to feed
Jane Austen Film and TV Locations: Belton House Part 1
August 17, 2010 in BBC , Belton House , Country House Visiting/Tourism , Film and TV Locations , Jane Austen , Pride and Prejudice | Tags: Colin Firth , Jane Austen , Jennifer Ehle , locations , Pride and Prejudice
Belton House has become rather popular as a film location in the past few years.
It was used in the  recent BBC TV adaptation of Jane Eyre starring Toby Stephens and Ruth Wilson- as Mrs Reed’s house and Celine Varens’ Parisian hotel -and of course was used by the BBC as Rosings for their 1995 adaptation of Pride and Prejudice starring Colin Firth and Jennifer Ehle.
Both exteriors and interiors were used, together with the local parish church, and so I will separate this subject into three posts, so as not to over burden you all at once.
Today, I will deal with the exteriors.
But first we ought to consider a little  of Belton’s history.
It is now a National Trust property but for 300 years it was the home of the Brownlow and then the Cust families, influential Lincolnshire landowners whose families intermarried with the Dukes of Ancaster at Grimsthorpe and the Cecils of Burghley House .
As you can clearly see from the style of the house, -its south front is shown above-it was built in the late 17th century, between 1684 and 1688.
It was commissioned by “Young” Sir John Brownlow, seen here as he appears in his portrait which still hangs in the formal saloon of the house.
For years legend had it that the house was designed by Sir Christopher Wren but this is now thought to be false,and that the real architect of the house is more likely to have been a contemporary of Sir Christopher, the soldier, architect and member of the Royal Society, William Winde.
This all, of course,  makes it totally unsuitable to appear in the adaptation as Rosings, which was described in Pride and Prejudice as appearing from Mr Collins’ garden as follows:
But of all the views which his garden, or which the country or the kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with the prospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house.
It was a handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.
At the time Jane Austen was writing First Impressions (1795) or revising what became  Pride and Prejudice, published in 1813, it is clear that  a house built in the 1680s would not have been considered as being at all modern;-).
Still,it made logistical sense to film  at Belton as the majority of the location filming of the series was undertaken throughout the midlands area of England-ranging from Great Sherston in Wiltshire in the west, to Belton in the east, Lyme Park (Pemberley exteriors)in the north and to Lacock ( Meryton) in the south, according to the map included in the book The Making of Pride and Prejudice by Sue Birtwhistle and Susie Conklin.
We first see the north front of Belton House as it is being approached by  the clearly terrified Sir William and  Maria Lucas, a sanguine Elizabeth Bennet and Charlotte Collins(nee Lucas)and a fretfully boastful Mr Collins.
The garden on the north front ,known as the Dutch garden, which the group pass through on their way to meet Lady Catherine and her daughter,has undergone a few changes over the last few years since the filming took place.
The planting in the garden is essentially the same but the yew trees which were getting out of control have ,as you can see, been cut back severely.
New growth has covered the stumped that remained, and  they are now about half the size they once were,but it was a shock to the system when this necessary but seemingly brutal garden maintenance took place a few years ago.
This is the famous limestone sundial that the group pass as they walk towards Rosings.
It inspired the children’s book, The Moondial by Helen Cresswell.
Viscount Tyrconnell bought it for the garden at Belton, and it was carved by the Danish master carver,Caius Gabriel Cibber who was sculptor in ordinary to William III and who worked on St Paul’s Cathedral, Hampton Court Palace and Chatsworth House.
The north front is also the scene of Darcy’s hasty retreat after his first proposal of marriage has been rejected by a furious Elizabeth Bennet.
We are shown the west front of the house as he angrily strides back to his aunt’s house ….
…up the steps leading to the entrance to the saloon…
Here is a short video of the scene from the north front of the house looking over the Dutch Garden:
Some of the most lovely shots of the countryside around Belton, complete with hanging woods, are seen in the scenes where Elizabeth Bennet wanders around the grounds and groves at Rosings.
The ground to the east of the house gradually rises to the Belmount Tower, along an avenue of what was once elm trees and are now Turkey oaks.This building  cannot now be accessed though the grounds  and park of Belton House but it was once very much part of it.
A deep ha-h separates it from the Belton  grounds, and to gain access to it now you have to go  via a road leading from Belton village.
Here it is, with obligingly picturesque deer in the foreground.
The tower was built between 1749 and 1751 by William Grey and Samuel Smith.
Originally it was flanked by two lower arches but these were removed in the late 18th century.
The tower was used as a focal point for the eastern avenue of elms, as seen from the house, and as a high vantage point from which the Belton estate could be viewed.
Jane Austen’s distant kinswoman by marriage, Caroline Lybbe Powys, visited Belton in 1757, and while she was dismissive of the house seemed to have been impressed by Belmount, or Belle Mount as she called it:
In the evening we went  to Belton House, the seat of Lady Cust.
Tis nothing more than a good family house.
Two things relative to it we were desired to remember viz that the original of sash windows was at the erecting of this edifice in Charles I’s time: the second that from a temple in the garden called Belle Mount you may see seven counties at once, a thing from one spot thought very remarkable…
It is towards this tower that Elizabeth and Colonel Fitzwilliam walk, when he informs Elizabeth of Darcy’s dreadful interference in Bingley’sromantic affairs, thereby ending Jane Bennet’s hopes of marrying him.
Badly done, Darcy.
As you can see, the  east front of the house is plainly visible in this shot and it is toward the east front that the couple return after Elizabeth suddenly developes a “political”  headache.
This high ground is also the point used for the scene where Darcy presents Elizabeth with The Letter,
and where she reads the first part of it….
.
The parts of the Belton grounds that were not used in the adaptation, the deer park to the south and east of the house,
the Italian Sunken Garden
and the Jeffrey Wyatville  designed conservatory dating from 1810
compete with tender plants…
and goldfish filled pond and statuary
are worthwhile visiting in themselves.
As are the interiors of the house and the parish church of Belton village which both featured in the 1995 version of Pride and Prejudice and will be the next subjects of posts in this series about Jane Austen film and television locations.
I do hope you have enjoyed this jaunt around the Belton exteriors, and have been able to place them in the scenes from the BBC’s last adaptation of  Pride and Prejudice.
Rate this:
Share this post:
Facebook
Pinterest
Twitter
Email
Reddit
Tumblr
Google
Like this:
Like Loading...
Related
Don't Miss a Post: Add Your Email Address Below to Have Posts Sent to You
If you are not a Wordpress member, just add your email here to subscribe to this site.
An Invitation to Visit our Sister Site: A Jane Austen Gazetteer
Click on the image above to visit our Sister Site: A Jane Austen Gazetteer
An Invitation to Visit our Sister Site: Jane Austen’s Letters
Click on the image above to visit our Sister Site: Jane Austen's Letters
Search AustenOnly Posts and Pages By Entering Your Search Term in the Box Below
Join Austen Only on Twitter
Recently Tweeted
“Emma” on BBC Radio 4’s “In Our Time” austenonly.com/2015/11/19/emm… https://t.co/hOtHg3hmMZ 4 months ago
A Jane Austen Themed Birthday Cake austenonly.com/2015/08/09/a-j… http://t.co/YI6RMp7aLS 7 months ago
The Jane Austen in Worthing WOW Festival austenonly.com/2015/08/07/the… http://t.co/TsSOGv0wm8 7 months ago
Reconstructing Jane Austen's Silk Pelisse: Hilary Davidson's… austenonly.com/2015/06/11/rec… http://t.co/gdYIVaoCv7 9 months ago
Crowdfunding Jane Austen's Pelisse Article.
wp.me/pGJsu-2z0 11 months ago
Follow @austenonly
Austenonly on Pinterest
Archives
November 2015
August 2015
June 2015
April 2015
December 2014
July 2014
December 2013
November 2013
April 2013
February 2013
January 2013
December 2012
November 2012
October 2012
September 2012
August 2012
July 2012
June 2012
May 2012
April 2012
March 2012
February 2012
January 2012
December 2011
November 2011
October 2011
September 2011
August 2011
July 2011
June 2011
May 2011
April 2011
March 2011
February 2011
January 2011
December 2010
November 2010
October 2010
September 2010
August 2010
July 2010
June 2010
May 2010
April 2010
March 2010
February 2010
January 2010
December 2009
November 2009
October 2009
Categories
Categories
Top Posts & Pages
The Interesting History of White Soup
Book Review: "An Introduction to the Tokens at the Foundling Museum" by Janette Bright and Gillian Clarke
Jane Austen's Film and TV adaptation locations: Burghley Park and Some Costumes from Pride and Prejudice 2005
Jane Austen and Food
Jane Austen and London: "If they had uncles enough to fill all Cheapside, it would not make them one jot less agreeable."
Book Review: 'Napoleon and the Empire of Fashion (1795-1815)' by Cristina Barreto and Martin Lancaster
The Ha-Ha: all you wanted to know but were afraid to ask
Jane Austen Film and TV Locations: Sudbury Hall, Derbyshire.
Pemberley Interiors for the BBC's Pride and Prejudice (1995) Part I
Exhibition News and Book Review: Johan Zoffany by Mary Webster
Thomas Rowlandson: Pleasures and Pursuits in Georgian England
Top Clicks
austenonly.files.wordpres…
shop.royalmail.com/issue-…
austenonly.files.wordpres…
austenonly.files.wordpres…
austenonly.files.wordpres…
foodhistorjottings.blogsp…
austenonly.files.wordpres…
austenonly.files.wordpres…
austenonly.files.wordpres…
austenonly.files.wordpres…
Copyright Notice
Copyright:  This site and all images and information complied within are copyright Austenonly.com unless otherwise stated/attributed.
No permission is given/implied for any use of this site, the information and images contained therein, for any commercial use whatsoever.
No material may be copied in any form without first obtaining written permission of the author, save that extracts of posts may be used on other  non-commcerial sites on the internet, provided that full and clear credit is given to Austenonly.com with appropriate and specific direction to the original content( that is, a link must be provided to the original post/image with full attribution ).
The existence of the RSS or ATOM feeds in no way authorises  wholesale or part transmission of posts or parts of posts to another site without prior permission being given and  attribution stated.
Any sites using RSS or ATOM feeds in this way without obtaining prior written permission of the author of this blog will be subject to legal action.
Currently Reading
Jane Austen’s Guide to Modern Life’s Dilemmasby Rebecca Smith
Recently Read
James Wyatt, Architect to George III by John Martin Robinson
Uvedale Price (1747-1829): Decoding the Picturesque” by Charles Watkins and Ben Cowell
"The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy” by Hannah Glasse, published by Prospect Books.
The Letters of Mrs Lefroy: Jane Austen’s Beloved Friend, edited by Helen Lefroy and Gavin Turner
Understanding Jane Austen: Key Concepts in the Six Novels
The London Square” by Todd Longstaffe-Gowan
"What Matters in Jane Austen?
:Twenty Crucial Puzzles Solved" by John Mullan
May, Lou and Cass: Jane Austen's Nieces in Ireland by Sophia Hillan
An Introduction to the Tokens at the Foundling Museum” by Janette Bright and Gillian Clarke
Vauxhall Gardens: A History by David Coke and Alan Borg
Facing Beauty: Painted Women and Cosmetic Art by Aileen Ribeiro
Johan Zoffany by Mary Webster
Bergere,Poke and Cottage: Understanding Early Nineteenth Century Headwear” by Serena Dyer
The First Actresses: Nell Gwyn to Sarah Siddons by Gill Perry with Joseph Roach and Shearer West
Jane Austen's Letters (4th Edition) edited by Deirdre Le Faye
Ice Cream by Ivan Day
Rooms With a View: The Open Window in the 19th Century by Sabine Rewald
Pastel Portraits of 18th Century Europe by Katharine Baetjer and Marjorie Shelly
The Paper Garden by Molly Peacock
The Eighteenth Century Church in Britain by Terry Friedman
Napoleon and the Empire of Fashion 1795-1815 by Christina Barreto and Martin Lancaster
Regarding Thomas Rowlandson: His Life, Art and Acquaintance by Matthew and James Payne
The Omnipotent Magician:Lancelot "Capability" Brown by Jane Brown
The Cambridge Companion to Jane Austen, Second Edition.
Thomas Rowlandson: Pleasures and Pursuits in Georgian England, edited by Patricia Phagan
Ralph Allen, Builder of Bath by Diana Winsor
Fashioning Fashion European Dress in Detail 1700-1915
Jellies and their Moulds by Peter Brears
Thomas Lawrence: Regency Power and Brilliance
Sir Thomas Lawrence by Michael Levey
The Georgian Buildings of Bath by Walter Ison
The Catalogue to the Chatsworth Attic Sale
State Beds and Throne Canopies:Care and Conservation by Val Davies
The English Parsonage in the Early Nineteenth Century by Timothy Brittain-Catlin
The Secret History of Georgian London: How the Wages of Sin Shaped the Capital by Dan Cruickshank
London's Country Houses by Caroline Knight
Horace Walpole's Strawberry Hill by Michael Snodin
Quilts 1700-2010: Hidden Histories, Untold Stories by Sue Prichard
Mrs Delany's Menus, Medicine and Manners by Katherine Cahill
Mrs Delany and her Circle by Mark Laird and Alicia Weisberg-Roberts
The Brabourne Edition of Jane Austen's Letters at CUP (Vol 1)
The Brabourne Edition of Jane Austen's Letters at CUP (Vol 2)
Birds of Passage: Henrietta Clive's Travels in South India 1798-1801 edited by Nancy K Shields
Enterprising Women and Shipping in the 19th Century by Helen Doe
Over a Red Hot Stove edited by Ivan Day
Coke of Norfolk 1754-1843: A Biography by Susanna Wade Martins
Georgian Jewellery 1714-1830 by Ginny Redington Dawes and Olivia Collings
Paul Sandby: Picturing Britain Edited by John Bonehill and Stephen Daniels
Silhouette: The Art of Shadow by Emma Rutherford
The Dress of the People by John Styles
Behind Closed Doors by Amanda Vickery
The Compleat Housewife by Eliza Smith, Chawton Edition
A New System of Domestic Cookery by Maria Rundell
Blogroll
Jane Austen In Portuguese
Book Blogs I Like to Visit
Bookish NYC
Harriet Devine's Blog
Random Jottings
Country Houses I Recommend You to Visit
Belton House
Burghley House
Chatsworth House and Estate
Peckover House
Sudbury Hall
History Site/Blogs
Centre for 18th Century Studies
Colonial Williamsburg
Historic Food
Shakespeare's England
The Baskerville Project
The Complete Works of Sir Thomas Lawrence
Treasure House
Jane Austen Blogs
Austen Blog
Austen Prose
Austenacious
Jane Austen in Vermont
Jane Austen Sequels
Jane Austen Today
Jane Austen's House Museum's Blog Spot
Jane Austen's Regency World Magazine
Jane Austen's World
Jane Obsessed with Jane
November's Autumn
The Jane Austen Project
Two Teens in the Time of Austen
Jane Austen Fashion
Andrea Galer
Costume on show at the Los Angeles County Museum
Dressing History
The Fashion Museum ,Bath
The History Wardrobe
The Manchester Gallery of Costume at Platt's Hall
Jane Austen Places
Chawton House Library
Chawton House Library Blog Spot
Chawton House Slide Show
Jane Austen in Hampshire
Jane Austen's Bath
Jane Austen's Bath at the British Library
Jane Austen's House Museum
The Assembly Rooms, Bath
The Jane Austen Trail at the Curtis Museum, Alton
The North Waltham, Steventon, Ashe and Dean History Society
Jane Austen Sites
Jane Austen Books
Jane Austen's History of England at the British Library
Jane Austen's House Museum
Jane Austen's House Museum's Blog Spot
Jane Austen's Will
The Friendship Book of the Reverend James Stanier Clarke
Jane Austen Societies
Jane Austen Society of Australia
Jane Austen Society of Brasil
NY Chapter of JASNA
The Jane Austen Society of Brazil
The Jane Austen Society of North America
The Jane Austen Society of the United Kingdom
Miscellaneous
Blog Catalogue
Jane Austen's Music Transcripts.
Prospect Books
Museums
Bristol's Georgian House Museum
Costume on show at the Los Angeles County Museum
Lyme Regis Museum Blog
Muse at the Holburne Museum, Bath
Pickford's House Museum Georgian Garden,Derby
Pickford's House Museum, Derby
Portsmouth Historic Dockyard
The Geffrye Museum
The Georgian Garden Bath
The Jane Austen Trail at the Curtis Museum Alton
The Judges Lodgings Museum Lancaster
The Kyoto Costume Institute
The Lewis Walpole Library at Yale
The Manchester Gallery of Costume at Platt's Hall
The Museum Network – Portraits and Portraiture
The Royal Pavilion, Brighton
The Wedgwood Museum
Twickenham Museun
V+A 18th Century Men's Fashion in 3D
V+A 18th Women's Fashion in 3D
Yale Centre for British Art
Austenonly Flickr
More Photos
Pages
About and Contents
Jane Austen’s Sense and Sensibility
Dualogues and Scenes from the Novels of Jane Austen by Rosina Filippi:”The Settlement Question” from Sense and Sensibility.
Jane Austen’s Pride and Prejudice
Jane Austen’s Mansfield Park
Jane Austen’s Emma
Jane Austen’s Northanger Abbey
Jane Austen’s Persuasion
Jane Austen’s Sanditon
Jane Austen’s Film and TV Adaptation Locations
The Library
Antiquarian Section
Jane Austen’s Works
Jane Austen and Bath
Jane Austen and Christmas
Jane Austen and Fashion
Jane Austen and Food
Jane Austen and London
Jane Austen and Medical Matters
Jane Austen and the Law
Jane Austen’s Particular Places
Jane Austen’s People
Jane Austen and Servants
Jane Austen and the Theatre
August 2010
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
« Jul
Sep »
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
Visit Book Blogs
This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Licence .
11 comments
August 17, 2010 at 8:19 pm
Kathryn Ann
Thank you Julie!
Your post has simply made me want to visit all the more.
The shot you have posted of the west front of the house as Darcy angrily strides abck to his aunt’s house has long been used for my computer’s wallpaper….
love learning more about the house, and can’t wait for your next post!
August 17, 2010 at 10:12 pm
jfwakefield
Hello!
How lovely to “see” you here at AustenOnly.That is a fantastic series of scenes, isn’t it ?
All the more interesting when you realise they were filmed approximately 20 miles apart!
The Old Rectory at Teigh in Rutland was used as Hunsford Rectory, and I will be posting about that soon too ;-)
August 18, 2010 at 12:49 am
Caitlin
Wow!
They got a lot of use out of that one location, didn’t they?
I’m going to look at the section on Belton in The English Country House in Perspective (thank you sooo much for that recommendation – I have such fun with it) while rereading this post.
As for the trees, one has to be cruel to be kind, eh?
(but ouch!)
August 18, 2010 at 7:27 am
jfwakefield
Yes, as a gardener I understand the decision but it was a shock to see the stumps when the surgery took place!
They used their locations (and made their location choices) very carefully, I agree.
August 18, 2010 at 6:28 am
Lizzy
Thank you for the adrenaline rush, Julie.
Fifteen years on, I am still in awe of the 1995 adaptation.
I can place your photos in every scene perfectly, I remember everything so well.
Lovely!
August 18, 2010 at 7:27 am
jfwakefield
My pleasure,Vanessa ;-)
August 18, 2010 at 10:34 pm
Cathy Allen
You’ve outdone yourself, my dear!
Our beloved BBC production of Pride and Prejudice “Rosings” locations simply shine in your posting.
I agree with everyone else: I’d love to visit Belton; I, too have the book, and shall have a look at it after work, and all your photos register in my mind with scenes from the movie!
Well done, Julie, thank you!
CEA
August 19, 2010 at 7:55 am
jfwakefield
Thank you!
I’m so glad you enjoyed this, Cathy- two more posts on Belton to come!
August 22, 2010 at 1:53 pm
imogen88
Oh, beautiful, Julie.
These scenes are among my all time favourites in that adaptation, and especially the outdoor ones.
Thank you so much for this treasure!
August 23, 2010 at 9:00 am
jfwakefield
My pleasure, Moni.
August 26, 2010 at 8:00 pm
Jane Austen’s TV and Film Adaptation Locations: The Belton House Interiors used in the BBC’s Pride and Prejudice,1995, Part II.
« austenonly
[…] we discovered in this post here, Belton House in Lincolnshire was used for the setting of Rosings in the BBC’s 1995 adaptation of Pride and […]
Meta
Register
Log in
Entries RSS
Comments RSS
Blog at WordPress.com.
« Georgian Food, Clothes and Candles at Fairfax House
Austen Attired: Marvellous Costume Exhibit at the Magnificent Peckover House »
Blog at WordPress.com.
The Tarski Theme .
Subscribe to feed.
Follow
Follow “Austenonly”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 4,283 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.
%d bloggers like this: