NOV
MAR
Apr
18
2014
2016
2017
26 captures
22 Nov 08 - 5 Apr 16
Close Help
Passionate about British Heritage
Toggle navigation
Attractions
England
Scotland
Wales
London
History
England
Scotland
Wales
Accommodation
B&Bs
Historic Hotels
Self Catering
Home > England > Lincolnshire > Historic Houses > Belton House
Belton House
History, tourist information, and nearby accommodation
BY DAVID ROSS , EDITOR
Overview
Historic Connections
Nearby Attractions
Accommodation
HERITAGE RATING:
?
The grand entrance
to Belton House
Belton is one of the foremost stately homes in Lincolnshire.
The Brownlow family acquired the estate in 1617, and the current manor was built from 1685-88 for 'Young' Sir John Brownlow.
It is not certain who Brownlow used for his architect.
Several possibilities have been put forward, including Sir Christopher Wren , Roger Pratt, and William Winde, architect of Coombe Abbey.
The house was modelled on Clarendon House, London (since demolished).
Earlier Elizabethan houses had popularized a design built like an H, with a central block one room deep flanked by wings.
Belton was one of the first houses to create a central block two rooms deep, the so-called 'double pile' design.
This allowed for more light, greater privacy, and easier roof construction.
The Brownlow and Cust families owned the house for over 300 years before it passed to the National Trust in 1984.
The exteriors of Belton present one of the finest examples of Restoration (Carolean) architecture in the country.
Film-goers will recognize the house as the setting for several films, including Jane Eyre, Pride and Prejudice, and Tom Jones.
The interior, by contrast, features a wide range of styles, with rooms decorated in Restoration, Regency, Victorian, and 1930 styles.
The showcase room is the Marble Hall, by which visitors enter.
This chamber is named for the pattern of black and white marbled tiles used for the floor.
Another chamber worthy of note is the Queen's Room, remodelled for a visit from Queen Adelaide.
This chamber boasts an ornate state bed monogrammed with the initial 'AR' for Adelaide Regina.
The Chinese Room features hand painted 18th century wall paper.
The formal gardens and
Belton church
A particular feature of the house are the wonderful set of wood carvings by 18th century master Grinling Gibbons .
There are also collections of fine porcelain, silver, painting, and tapestries.
The house is set in 36 acres of Italian and Dutch formal gardens, and huge informal gardens.
Close to the house is the formal garden area, which is an absolute delight, with water features and symmetrical paths set off by statuary and curving lines of stone walls and hedges.
The centrepiece of the gardens is the Orangery, with its display of exotic plants.
Beside the Orangery is the 12th century parish church of St Peter and St Paul, where many of the Brownlow and Cust families are buried.
The family memorials are an extraordinary sight.
The combination of the formal gardens with the Orangery and church together make for an unforgettable sight.
Beyond the formal garden area you will find lovely treed parkland, with a Lakeside Walk, and a restored Victorian boathouse.
In the grounds is a sundial that featured in the book 'The Moondial', by Helen Creswell.
Belton For Familes
There's a lot to keep kids occupied at Belton House.
In the house is a playroom where children and adults can dress up in Victorian costume, as well as play with period toys and games.
There is an extremely large adventure playground, and the miniature railway runs most days in the spring and summer (a small charge applies).
The hedge maze will also prove popular with the younger generation.
The grounds are extensive, with plenty of opportunity for children to run around.
About Belton House
Address: Grantham, Lincolnshire, England, NG32 2LS
Attraction Type: Historic House
Location: 3 m NE Grantham, on A607
Website: Belton House
Email: belton@nationaltrust.org.uk
Phone: 01476 566 116
National Trust - see also: National Trust memberships (official website link)
Location     map
OS: SK929 395
Photo Credit: David Ross and Britain Express
HERITAGE
We've 'tagged' this attraction information to help you find related historic attractions and learn more about major time periods mentioned.
Find other attractions tagged with:
17th century (Time Period) - Restoration (Historical Reference) -
NEARBY HISTORIC ATTRACTIONS
Heritage Rated from 1- 5 (low-exceptional) on historic interest
Grantham House -                          2.2                         miles (Historic Building)
Normanton, St Nicholas Church -                          4.4                         miles (Historic Church)
Ellys Manor House -                          5.6                         miles (Historic Building)
Haceby, St Barbara's Church -                          6.6                         miles (Historic Church)
Fulbeck Manor -                          6.8                         miles (Historic House)
Belvoir Castle -                          7.7                         miles (Historic House)
Easton Walled Gardens -                          7.9                         miles (Garden)
Woolsthorpe Manor -                          9.4                         miles (Historic Building)
Nearest Accommodation to Belton House:
Self Catering   -   B&Bs/Guesthouses   -   Hotels
Nearest Self Catering Cottages
Granary Loft, Grantham -               7.3               miles
Grantham, Lincolnshire
Sleeps: 2
Stay from: £154.00 - 333.00
The Bake House, Sleaford -               7.3               miles
Sleaford, Lincolnshire
Sleeps: 2
Stay from: £258.00
Manor Barn, Walcot -               8.5               miles
Walcot, Lincolnshire
Sleeps: 7
Stay from: £327.00 - 789.00
More             self catering near Belton House
Nearest Hotels
De Vere Belton Woods -               2               miles
Belton, Lincolnshire
Stay from: £59.00
Angel and Royal Hotel -               2.4               miles
Grantham, Lincolnshire
Stay from: £40.00
Olde Barn Hotel -               3.4               miles
Marston, Lincolnshire
Stay from: £47.00
More Hotels near Belton House
Nearest Bed and Breakfasts
The Red House -                   2.2                  miles
Great Gonerby, Leicestershire
From: £40.00
Crown and Anchor -                   2.9                  miles
Welby, Lincolnshire
From: £55.00
Allington Manor -                   4.6                  miles
Grantham, Lincolnshire
From: £95.00
More             bed and breakfasts near Belton House
Attraction search
Find
in
Find
Lincolnshire
Attractions
All attractions
Attractions map
Abbeys
Castles
Gardens
Historic Buildings
Historic Churches
Historic Houses
Museums
Roman sites
Towns and Villages
Featured
Lincoln
Travel Resources
Tourist Information Centres
Travel links
Attractions
Lincolnshire Hotels
Lincoln
Bed & Breakfast
Self Catering
National Trust
National Trust  membership
Free entry to National Trust properties throughout England, Wales, and Northern Ireland, plus discounted admission to National Trust for Scotand properties.
Membership details
About the National Trust
Attractions
Top Historic Attractions in Lincolnshire
Lincoln Cathedral
Cathedral
Burghley House
Historic House
Barton upon Humber, St Peters Church
Historic Church
Ellys Manor House
Historic Building
Lincoln Castle
Castle
Belton House
Historic House
Doddington Hall
Historic House
Grimsthorpe Castle
Historic House
Towns / villages
Lincoln
Barton upon Humber
Caistor
Crowland
Gainsborough
Grantham
Accommodation
Self Catering near Grantham
Granary Loft
Grantham
Sleeps 2, from £154.00
Passionate about British Heritage!
Connect
Britain Express is a labour of love by David Ross, an avid  historian, photographer, and 'Britain-ophile'.
Connect with us on Facebook and (soon) Google Plus
Fun stuff
Heritage Traveller Blog
British History Quiz
Historic Attraction Quiz
Monarch Mayhem
This Day in British History
Useful stuff
Contact Us
Privacy
About Britain Express
TOP
‹ › ×
×
Previous
Next