National Trust
Easter egg hunts at Bodiam Castle
There's something strange about the eggs at Bodiam Castle this Easter.
The Easter bunny is definitely not the only one visiting here.
Our experts think we have dragon's eggs.
Come and find them and save the castle from a fiery siege.
Bodiam Castle
Bring your family to Bodiam Castle this St George's Day and your bold knight or daring princess can face the dragon themselves.
Visit our What's On section to find out more.
A springtime visit to the castle
With the promise of warmer days Bodiam Castle is coming alive after the winter.
Come and take time to explore the castle and find out about life here back in the 14th century.
Enjoy a guided tour with one of our costumed characters or simply let your group explore for themselves.
Group visits to Bodiam Castle will provide a memorable day out for everyone.
Bodiam Castle
Come enjoy the castle in the spring sunshine.
Our medieval characters are giving hourly talks and we've some great activities planned for St. George's weekend.
Bodiam Castle
Not all National Trust shops are the same.
There are core products that everyone likes to see and the seasonal ranges that feature across the Trust, but there is also scope for each shop to be individual.
Bodiam Castle
Bring history to life with a visit to Bodiam Castle for your school or college pupils.
We have a range of activities to cater for all ages and abilities.
Bodiam Castle
With its majestic towers and wide moat, our 14th-century castle is a perfect setting for a memorable wedding day.
Bodiam Castle
Visit the gatehouse towers at Bodiam Castle where our record-breaking bats have their roosts.
Bodiam Castle
Piers & Ollie really enjoyed their first day volunteering and couldn't wait to come back to Bodiam Castle.
Our volunteers play a significant part in our work.
Discover what they do and how to join in.
Places nearby
Medieval yeoman's house and garden
Join
Free parking for NT members.
Non-members:£3 for cars, £1 for motorcycles
Wharf tea-room serves home-cooked, seasonal, local food and drinks
Terrace Room, attached to the tea-room, is available for functions and events
Castle gift shop sells gifts, cards, books, plants and local produce including Bodiam wine and honey
Refreshment kiosk opposite the castle entrance is open during the summer and has open-air seating
Toilets are situated next to the tea-room in the main car park.
There are no toilet facilities near to the castle
Dogs on leads are welcome in the grounds only.
Dog tethering point and dog bowl outside ticket office opposite castle entrance.
Assistance dogs are welcome in all areas
Picnic benches are available outside the tea-room and next to the refreshment kiosk
Story of Bodiam exhibition area in ticket office
‘The history of Bodiam’ film showing in the north-east tower
Family
Baby-changing facilities are available in the toilets at the main car park.
There are no facilities near to the castle
Children’s guide is available from the ticket office and the castle gift shop
Children’s sandpit next to the refreshment kiosk near the castle (weather permitting)
Find the wooden sculpture of Sir Edward Dallingridge in the grounds
The Wharf tea-room offers a children’s menu, high chairs, and a baby bottle and food-warming facility
Pocket money priced toys and games on sale in the castle gift shop
Family-focussed events throughout the year
Towers and ramparts to climb and explore and numerous masons’ marks to discover
See the ducks and fish in the moat
Various children’s trails and 50 things activities
Accessibility
Four designated mobility parking spaces in the main car park next to the tea-room and gift shop
Two designated mobility parking spaces next to Castle Cottage with easy access to the castle - ask in the car park for directions
A volunteer-driven mobility ‘buggy’ service can be requested in peak season from the main car park via visitor reception to the castle
Gravel paths throughout the site with some slopes and undulating terrain.
Paths can be muddy in wet weather
Steps into some rooms in the castle
Steep spiral staircases up to the towers and ramparts
Pictorial booklet of views from the castle towers and castle history is available for non-stair climbers from the castle gate
Ramped access to ‘The history of Bodiam’ film room
Accessible toilet in the main car park next to the tea-room
Two manual wheelchairs available to borrow from the tea-room and Castle Cottage respectively (to pre-book call 01580 830196, option 0)
Tea-room, shop and castle courtyard – level access
Braille guide available
Back to top
Archetypal 14th century moated castle with ruined interior - a glimpse of medieval splendour
Set in the heart of an historic landscape, with spiral staircases, battlements and a portcullis, 14th century Bodiam Castle is one of Britain's most picturesque and romantic ancient monuments.
Windows where arrows were once shot, a tower that was once a look-out and ruins that were once walked upon by knights; this is a place where you can relive your childhood memories and let your imagination run riot.
In the impressive gatehouse is the castle's original wooden portcullis, an extremely rare example of its kind.
Enough of the interior ruins survive to give an impression of castle life and gruesome and surprising tales can often be heard from our brewster, forester and other colourful characters from the past.
Plus we have lots of seasonal events throughout the year.
Please note: Entry to the grounds is included in our admission prices.
Tickets must be purchased to enter the castle and/or the grounds.
See our current admission prices here
Telephone
Bodiam, near Robertsbridge, East Sussex, TN32 5UA
By cycle
Cycle route information
By ferry
Seasonal passenger ferry (April to September) from Newenden Bridge, Newenden village on A28 - operated by Bodiam Boating Station (www.bodiamboatingstation.co.uk).
Booking advisable.
By bus
349 Stagecoach from Hastings train station to Hawkhurst, stops opposite main car park entrance.
By train
Seasonal steam railway from Tenterden town to Bodiam station: 1/4 mile.
Operated by Kent & East Sussex Railway (www.kesr.org.uk).
Mainline railway stations at Robertsbridge, 5 miles; Battle, 10 miles (London Charing Cross to Hastings route)  No public transport links from mainline railway stations, only private taxis.
No taxi rank at Robertsbridge - need to pre-book taxis.
Taxi rank at Battle.
By road
1.5 miles (2.2km) east, off B2244, 3 miles (5.6km) south of Hawkhurst.
Look out for The Curlew restaurant on crossroads opposite turning to Bodiam.
3 miles (5.6km) east of A21 at southern end of Hurst Green village, midway between Tunbridge Wells and Hastings.
Parking: In main car park next to shop and tea room at bottom of site.
Car park is approximately 400 yards from castle entrance.
Free parking for NT members.
Non members: £3 for cars, £1 for motorcycles, £5 for coaches.
On foot