BOOK TO WIN: Every day in March, someone will win a trip – book your hotel on TripAdvisor to enter!
Not ready to book?
No rush.
We've saved this trip in your cart so you can come back any time, compare prices, and complete your booking.
Moated medieval castle - Picture of Bodiam Castle, Bodiam
JOIN
Certificate of Excellence
What is Certificate of Excellence?
TripAdvisor awards a Certificate of Excellence to accommodations, attractions and restaurants that consistently earn great reviews from travelers.
Website
Robertsbridge | 13 miles from Rye on A268, Bodiam TN32 5UA, England
Description:
A majestic 14th Century moated castle, with ruined interior and...
read more
A majestic 14th Century moated castle, with ruined interior and splendid grounds.
Take part in various medieval activities, all year round.
Admission price covers entry to castle and grounds.
Opening hours are 10:30 til 5pm or dusk if earlier.
Please note that last entry to the castle is at approx.
3:20pm during winter.
Other Recent Reviews
“How Medieval Castles SHOULD look!”
Reviewed June 14, 2012
We went on a wet day and still had a good time!
What strikes you immediately is the perfect symmetry of the castle and this makes for great photos, even in the rain.
It has a full moat, stocked full of Koi and Carp that you have to cross to get to the castle itself.
It is much smaller than... More
Helpful?
Expedia.com Photos, Reviews and the Guaranteed Lowest Prices
Sponsored links
Reviews and advice on hotels, resorts, flights, vacation rentals, travel packages, and more so you can plan and book your perfect trip!
© 2016 TripAdvisor LLC All rights reserved.
TripAdvisor Terms of Use and Privacy Policy .
* TripAdvisor LLC is not a booking agent and does not charge any service fees to users of our site... (more)
TripAdvisor LLC is not responsible for content on external web sites.
Taxes, fees not included for deals content.
How to enter the Trip-A-Day Giveaway:
Option 1: Book your hotel directly on the TripAdvisor website using "Book on TripAdvisor" during the entry period and you will be entered.
Option 2: Find your hotel on TripAdvisor, then click from TripAdvisor to book on another site, then complete the entry form found here .
How it works:
You may enter one (1) time per email address during the Entry Period.
No purchase necessary.
Entry period begins on Tuesday, March 1, 2016 at 12:01:00 AM EST, and ends on Thursday, March 31, 2016 at 11:59:59 PM EST.
The Trip-A-Day Giveaway is open to legal residents of the United States and the District of Columbia who are 18 years of age or older.
To learn more about the Trip-A-Day Giveaway, click here .
close