Get in[ edit ]
The nearest major airport is London Gatwick, roughly an hour and a half away by road or rail. The Port of Dover is at a similar distance, and the Eurotunnel is roughly an hour by road.
By Car[ edit ]
The Main Road (A21) running north to south between London (M25) and Hastings runs parallel to the village. It takes roughly an hour and a half to get into central London by car from Robertsbridge, traffic permitting. Hastings is about 20 minutes away in the opposite (southerly) direction.
By Train[ edit ]
Robertsbridge train station is frequented by twice hourly services in both directions. To Hastings via Battle, Crowhurst, West St. Leonards and St. Leonards Warrior Square takes about 30 minutes. To London Charing Cross via Etchingham, Stonegate, Wadhurst, Frant, Tunbridge Wells, High Brooms, Tonbridge, Sevenoaks, Orpington and London bridge takes a little more than an hour.
By Bus[ edit ]
Rural bus services connect the village directly with other local settlements and the closest towns. However, due to its location on the main railway line, it is advisable to travel by train if your destination is Hastings, Battle or Tunbridge Wells as this is much quicker and more direct. Buses to nearby Bodiam and Hawkhurst, or after changing at Hawkhurst further into Kent to places like Tenterden, Cranbrook and Rye, can be caught from the bus stops on the small high street. (Timetables vary, and are displayed at the bus stops)
Get around[ edit ]
Robertsbridge is a great place for country walks, offering many public footpaths and bridleways in the immediate surrounding countryside. Walking is the best way to get around the village itself as well, its size easily permitting this.
Do[ edit ]
Bonfire night [6] , Held annually around the 5th of November, this celebration attracts people from miles around and is by far the biggest event of the year for the village. A large parade is held in carnival atmosphere, usually starting from the station and proceeding towards the recreational ground via the high street. A huge bonfire is lit, complete with Guy Fawkes' effigy, and the night culminates in a great fireworks display that goes well beyond its rural setting in terms of significance and spectacle. The event is free, with a street collection on the evening to help raise money for charity.
Buy[ edit ]
The village only offers local amenities. Two small convenience stores, a local chemist, baker, florist and hair-dresser.
Eat[ edit ]
Apart from its 3 pubs offering hearty traditional meals, Robertsbridge also has a good Indian Restaurant: New Spice 13 High St, Robertsbridge, TN32 5AE
Drink[ edit ]
Seven Stars Inn, High Street, Robertsbridge, East Sussex, TN32 5AJ, ☎ 01580 880333, [7] . Over 600yrs old and reputedly among the most haunted pubs in England. Open all day every day.   edit
Sleep[ edit ]
The George Inn, High Street Robertsbridge East Sussex TN32 5AW, ☎ 01580 880315, [8] . Cheapest rooms are 80gbp for single occupancy. Locally sourced, high standard food and drink.   edit
The Ostrich Hotel, The Ostrich Hotel Station Road, Robertsbridge East Sussex TN32 5DG, ☎ 01580 881737, [9] . Located adjacent to the station. Single rate 45gbp per night, 80gbp double room including breakfast.   edit
Glenferness B&B, Brightling Road, Robertsbridge, East Sussex, TN32 5DP, ☎ 01580 881 841, [10] . Double & Twin Ensuite: £70 - £75 for Double Occupancy, £40 - £45 for Single Occupancy Twin. Not Ensuite:£65 - £70 for Double Occupancy, £35 - £40 for Single Occupancy. Located just up the road from the station.   edit
This is a usable article.  It has information for getting in as well as some complete entries for restaurants and hotels.  An adventurous person could use this article, but please plunge forward and help it grow !