SEP
MAR
Apr
22
2015
2016
2017
2 captures
23 Sep 15 - 22 Mar 16
Close Help
Home
Issues
About
WIN
Subscribe
Advertise
Contact
Home
Issues
About
WIN
Subscribe
Advertise
Contact
22 Mar 2016 We Are Scientists Announce New Album ‘Helter Seltzer’
21 Mar 2016 Edinburgh Festival smash hit comes to The Grand Eastbourne for one night only
18 Mar 2016 Perfect Puds and Delectable Desserts at Ashdown Park Hotel
17 Mar 2016 Drawn To The Exotic: New Prunella Clough Exhibition at Jerwood Gallery
16 Mar 2016 Recognition for a life of giving by unsung Sussex hero
15 Mar 2016 My Dear Miss Terry…
14 Mar 2016 An Enemy of the People By Henrik Ibsen
11 Mar 2016 DAVID GEST IS NOT DEAD – BUT ALIVE WITH SOUL TOUR!
Featured
Bodiam Castle: A Castle of Wonder
donna 2015-02-22
22 Feb 2015
donna
0 0 0
With its spiral staircases, battlements and surrounding moat, Bodiam Castle is the real thing.
One of Britain’s most picturesque and evocative medieval ruins set in the heart of an historic landscape, much of its 600 years of history can still be seen today – from the iconic stone exterior rising dramatically above the moat, to the views across Sussex and its original fourteenth-century wooden portcullis.
© National Trust / Helene Marler
Bodiam Castle was built by Sir Edward Dallingridge, a knight who made his name and fortune in France fighting in the Hundred Years War.
Through his marriage to Elizabeth Wardeaux, he inherited the manor of Bodeham, as it was then called, upon her father’s death.
An influential figure in Parliament, Sir Edward persuaded King Richard II in 1385 to grant him permission to crenellate.
Not satisfied with merely improving the existing manor house, he decided to build a brand new castle, which had a working farmland, wharf and flour mill, as well as elaborately landscaped ponds and pools.
After the English Civil War, Bodiam Castle was abandoned and it gradually fell into disrepair.
Several people are responsible for its rescue and conservation, the most notable being Lord Curzon, Viceroy of India, who left the castle to the National Trust in 1926 who have cared for and conserved the castle and its grounds ever since.
Today visitors can experience medieval life inside the castle, enjoy walks and picnic around the grounds to appreciate its symmetry and imposing towers, or simply photography the many ducks and enormous carp in the moat.
Heather Packham, Visitor Experience Manager at Bodiam Castle comments: “The castle offers a fun packed event programme all year round – from archery, an annual fair, a knight’s and princess academy and even a visit from Father Christmas each December.
It really is a place where you can relive your childhood and let your imagination run riot.”
Stories of our Ancestors
© National Trust / Amanda Barden
In-keeping with the history of colourful characters at Bodiam Castle, medieval characters roam the ruins on a daily basis.
In authentic medieval costume they tell tales of the castle, how the household ran and host regularly changing demonstrations throughout the year – including everything from baking bread and minding your medieval manners to traditional masonry techniques which would have been used to build and repair the stonework.
Keen to tell intriguing and sometimes grizzly tales of medieval life, they provide a fascinating glimpse into the 14th-century mindset.
Brave visitors can also join in the story too, acting as anything from spit boys or gong scourers who had the lovely job of clearing the castle’s 28 toilets.
A Knight’s Peril
Newly introduced in 2014, A Knight’s Peril is an interactive audio adventure designed for all the family.
Visitors can take the challenge to follow their guide, Kate, a fictitious daughter of Sir Edward, to uncover a medieval murder plot unfolding within the castle walls.
Armed with a map and an ‘echo horn’, Kate guides you through the castle, where echoes of life in 1385 lead you to draw your own conclusions of who holds murderous intentions for Sir Edward.
Drawing on historically real and imagined characters, A Knight’s Peril offers a glimpse into medieval life with all its sounds and social scheming, set inside real 14th-century walls.
Tea, cake and shopping
No visit to a National Trust property would be complete without a visit to the tearoom for a slice of cake or one of its scrumptious scones.
Bodiam Castle is no exception and Marilyn’s Victoria sponge is worth a visit in itself.
The castle gift shop is also stocked with souvenirs, hamper items and knights and princess memorabilia for the little ones.
Events at Bodiam Castle
© National Trust
Easter holidays 28 March – 12 April
There is plenty to choose from over the Easter holidays to keep you and the family entertained, including a Cadbury Easter Egg Trail over the Easter weekend (3-6 April) archery lessons and between 7- 10 April, an Outlaw Academy where you can decide whether to use your skills to live off the land or defend the castle.
Spring Half Term 23 – 31 May
Come and play with medieval toys and games or maybe join Happening History from 26 – 31 May where you can make your very own medieval toy to take home with you.
Sir Edwards Fair 25 May
On the same day it was originally held in 1400’s, this annual fair is the chance for the whole family to enjoy a fun day out.
There are plenty of games and activities to choose from, from trying on armour, tractor rides around the grounds to exploring local craft stalls.
Bodiam Castle is open all year round.
For more information, visit www.nationaltrust.org.uk/bodiam-castle
or call 01580 831324.
Previous post
There is no more story.
Next post
Sussex Food & Drink Festivals 2015
You Might Also Like
Waste not, want not: nose-to-tail eating at Flank
February 24, 2016
0
Follow the leader…what makes a great boss?
February 24, 2016
0
Hot Cross Buns With A Twist!
February 24, 2016
0
How Sweet It Is…
January 27, 2016
0
No Comment
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Read insideSUSSEX ONLINE
Categories
Arts + Entertainment Business + Finance + Law Charity Christmas Days Out Education Events Fashion + Beauty Featured Food + Drink Getaways + Travel Health + Wellness Home + Garden Lifestyle Motors News Property
Latest Tweets
Tweets by @insideSUSSEXmag
Get your copy
insideSUSSEX is the only FREE luxury lifestyle publication covering the whole of Sussex.
Each monthly edition features Sussex’s best events, fashion, dining, accommodation, businesses, travel, days out, entertainment, celebrities, interviews and more.
insideSUSSEX is distributed free to more than 300 high-traffic venues in Sussex, including all Waitrose, select hotels, restaurants, spas, motor dealers, salons, visitor’s centres, cafes and retailers.
You can also read each issue of insideSussex for free online.
Read More
Instagram
Follow Us
Like us on Facebook
insideSUSSEX is published by Sideways Media Ltd .
Copyright 2014-15.
All rights reserved
SHARE
Bodiam Castle: A Castle of Wonder