REUNIFICATION PALACE IN SAIGON
Location: 135 Nam Kì Khởi Nghĩa Street, Bến Thành, Ho Chi Minh City
Hours: 7:30 AM - 11 AM and 1 PM - 4 PM
Admission: 30,000 VND
The Reunification Palace is not only an attraction but also a symbolic representation of its strength that withstood great historical revolutions.
Formerly, this place was known as the Independence Palace.
Today it continues to be a tourist hotspot.
Travelers come to understand more about the war and how the Vietnameses achieved their independence, as well as to know more about their culture.
During the Colonial Era when France ruled Southern Vietnam (also known as Cochinchina), then Governor Lagrandière commissioned a brand new stone building to replace the wooden palace in 1863.
This movement meant to solidify French presence in the new colony.
The new establishment would later be known as Norodom Palace - French colonial headquarters in Saigon - in 1873 when construction was complete.
The governors of Cochinchina used the palace as a place of residence and work.
It was also nicknamed the Governor’s Palace.
Additionally, Japan also based its headquarters there during World War II.
However, their victory was short-lived when Japan surrendered to Allied forces.
Most infamously, the Reunification Palace replaced the former site of the Norodom Palace after World War II.
France surrendered to the Việt Minh communists on 7 May 1954 and signed the Geneva Accords.
The agreement stated that the 17th Parallel would divide the country between north and south for two years.
Vièt Minh communists controlled north Vietnam while anti-communists controlled south Vietnam.
Norodom Palace was given to Prime Minister Ngô Đình Diệm.
When Diệm defeated the emperor, he declared himself as president to the Republic of Vietnam.
Although Diệm had authority over the government, he was not favored amongst his citizens.
In 1962 his own air force had an unsuccessful assassination attempt on him.
The bomb was said to have dropped in the same room as he was during that moment but it had failed to detonate.
Diệm commanded a new residence be built with an addition to an underground bomb shelter in the basement.
Unfortunately he would never see the completed structure because he was killed in 1963.
Diệm’s proposed infrasture was known as the Independence Palace.
Architect Ngô Viết Thụ implemented the design for the palace.
The architecture is a balance blend of both traditional and modern aspects.
It was home to the successive South Vietnamese President Ngyễn Văn Thiệu until his departure from office in 1975.
Amid Thiệu’s reign, the Independence Palace was South Vietnam’s government headquarters during the Vietnam War.
Nevertheless, on 30 April 1975, South Vietnam was seized by North Vietnam’s military forces.
North Vietnamese army crashed through the iron gates of the Independence Palace.
This marked the finale of the Vietnamese War.
The Provisional Revolutionary Government renamed the place to the Reunification Palace in November 1975 after reaching an agreement between both North and South Vietnamese.
There are many rooms here, like the “National Security Council Chamber,” “Ambassadors Chamber,” “President Reception Salon,” and “Conference Hall.”
Additionally, tanks, cars, maps, and weapons displayed have become historical artifacts.
It is a reminder of Vietnam’s resilience to fight for its freedom and independence.
Moreover, you should not miss replicas of the two tanks (843 and 390) that crashed the palace’s iron gates at 11:30 AM from 30 April 1975.
The Reunification Palace is a symbol of Ho Chi Minh City, a place that you should visit if you want to know more about the Vietnam War.
There are both English and French-speaking tour guides upon request at the information desk.
Author: Anh Ly