Step inside an eerie Saigon palace with a terrifying past.

Two numbered tanks stand inside the entrance of the Reunification Palace. Stunning, the tanks, 390 and 843, are the very pair that crashed through the palace gates in April 1975. That was the month when American-backed South Vietnam fell to the North and the victors draped their flag over the Saigon icon’s balcony.

The palace – a kind of Vietnamese White House – was designed as the home of “not only incapable but mad” Catholic strongman, Ngo Dinh Diem: Vietnam’s US-backed president until his 1962 assassination. Built on the site of a French-colonial mansion, the building – originally called Independence Palace – was completed in 1966.

Modern-design fans worship the palace that resembles a cricket pavilion set amid parkland peppered with frangipani trees. The floral scent and the racket kicked up by cicadas create a wild feel. In fact, the palace complex is one of the greenest spots in downtown motobike-infested District 1.

If you stroll across the lawn past the palace’s fountain through the front door, at first like me you may feel that you have entered a giant anti-climax: a glorified function suite with a roped-off staircase. You may start to think that the guidebooks skate over the palace for a reason – you may wish that you had just peered through the railings or gone to the nearby War Remnants Museum like everyone else.

But, once you find the palace’s flanking staircases, you will see how the building – spookily preserved just-as-it-was like a crime scene – unfolds. One highlight of the time capsule is the maze-like bunker basement that served as a wartime command centre. The bunker feels like the underbelly of the horrible US-coloured civil war that dragged on 20 years.

Along with the presidential Mercedes, the bunker contains an array of clunky period rotary phones, massive maps and telex equipment. You can just picture flustered intelligence specialists sweating at news of advancing Viet Cong troops, praying for good news to give to Madame Nhu.

Also called the Dragon Lady, Madame Nhu was the wife of the secret police boss brother of bachelor president, Diem.

As Diem’s troops fought northern communist forces, Madame Nhu adopted the role of first lady with style, taking on a reception room.

Madame Nhu must have been a daunting figure to meet. Svelte and sinister in her tight ao dai dress, she was said to be the most devious beauty east of Suez. She would die, just shy of 90 on April 24, 2011.

On the day of my palace visit via cyclo from downtown Ben Thanh market, a ponytailed palace guide in a classic clingy ao dai looks just as seductive as the dragon lady, without the airs.

I take the guide’s picture in a distant offhand way, feigning fascination with the furnishings around her, then zigzag upwards along corridors lit by streaming sunshine.

The third floor, which was allotted for playing cards and watching films, still supports the regime’s old plush red cinema. Elsewhere, the décor is sparse yet kitsch. Think chandeliers and gewgaws such as decorative tusks and stuffed big cats.

On the flat roof — the old dance floor with views of parkland and skyscrapers – a Huey helicopter sits. The contraption underlines that, in its day, the palace was a southern stronghold. Because the palace symbolised the US-backed government that hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese and 58,000 Americans died trying to save, the Viet Cong treated it as a top target.

On Feb 27, 1962, two turncoat pilots of Diem’s Vietnam Air Force flew two A-1 Skyraider aircraft at the palace and, instead of staging a raid against the Viet Cong, bombed it. The rebels – or traitors – wrecked much of the left wing. Diem, however, escaped death that time. A bomb that pierced a room in the western wing where he was reading failed to explode, prompting him to claim in a burst of irrational exuberance that he had “divine protection”.

Because the palace was nonetheless smashed, Diem had it demolished. In its place, he commissioned the current building that he would never see finished. The designer: Ngô Viet Thu, the first Asian to win France’s top architecture prize, the Rome laureate. He shaped the building in harmony with fengshui principles.

But fengshui failed to stop the next attack that happened on April 8, 1975. The perpetrator: Nguyen Thanh Trung, a Vietnam Air Force pilot and undetected communist spy later destined to fly Vietnam Airlines Boeings.

Departing from Biên Hòa Air Base on Saigon’s outskirts, Trung flew a hornet-like F-5E aircraft at the palace, determined to destroy the symbol of Catholic domination. The two bombs he tossed fell smack on the palace’s heliport roof, but did little damage.

Strikingly, red circles right by the parked Huey mark the spots where they fell. Trung’s skinny bomber jet now stands at the palace gates near the twin Russian-made T-54 tanks that terminated the pro-West regime fronted by the giant responsible for Diem’s murder, General Minh.

The two tanks rolled up at 10.45am on April 30, punching right through the gates. Just to rub the rout in, a soldier raced up the stairs to the balcony then hoisted the yellow-starred VC flag. Later, in another humiliating twist, the palace’s cabinet room would serve as the stage for the official handover of power.

New York Times writer Mitchell Owens describes the drama-packed building as the “sexiest” in South-East Asia. If you visit Vietnam, you must see it – if only to witness the crouched entranceway tanks that still look ready to rumble. Intense.

Reunification Palace is in District 1, central Saigon. The palace opens from 7.30am to 11am and 1pm to 4pm. Admission is 15,000 Dong (RM2) per adult and another 5,000 for the guide book. - By David Wilsonnification
By Mark Ratcliff