The "Reunification Palace" in HCMC was formerly known as the "Independence Palace."
Prior to reunification in 1975, South Vietnam (a.k.a., Republic of Vietnam) was a separate country with its own flag, army, and government which held sway over the southern half of the country up to the 17th parallel.
The Independence Palace stands on the site of the old "Norodom Palace" which the French colonials built in 1873 as the official residence of the governor-general of French Indochina.
When the French left Vietnam in 1954, the Norodom Palace was handed over to Ngo Dinh Diem, the first president of South Vietnam.
Diem resided in the Norodom Palace until it was bombed by rogue pilots of the South Vietnamese air force.
Instead of restoring it, he had the old colonial landmark torn down and ordered the Independence Palace to be built in its stead in 1962.
Right: A bombardier's view of the old Norodom Palace.
The 189-yr.
old Palace was leveled in 1962 to give way to the Independence Palace which was completed in 1966.
Photo credit: commons.wikimedia.org.
The Independence Palace has a modern post-colonial look which sets it apart from the Francophone architecture of the old Norodom Palace and other colonial-era buildings still standing in Vietnam.
Unlike the brick, stone, and terracotta-clad colonial buildings, the Palace is made of glass and poured concrete.
The building's most prominent architectural feature is the concrete sunscreen (bris-soleil) which covers the building's facade.
The tetrahedral baffles of the bris-soleil remind one of bamboo nodes.
Like the battlements of a medieval castle, this protective feature makes the Palace look like it were prepared for a siege.
The Independence Palace also survived a bombing raid by an undercover Viet Cong pilot serving in the South Vietnamese air force.
Left: Our mid-afternoon tour of the Reunification Palace begins at the foyer inside the main entrance.
Photo by Iso.
The Palace main entrance at the ground floor opens into a large central foyer which intersects the hallway running parallel to the facade of the building.
The afternoon we visited, the foyer was bathed with natural light streaming in through the glass curtain wall and clerestory windows above the main entrance canopy.
An enormous red oval rug decorated with the inevitable dragon motif woven in gold thread occupies the center of the foyer between the entrance and the red-carpeted grand staircase which was roped-off.
The Reunification Palace has a T-shaped footprint with the foyer and the grand staircase forming the stem of the "T" and the Palace rooms occupying the wings.
Service stairways and elevators are located at the end of both wings of the building.
Tour groups use these stairways to access the upper floors.
The roped-off grand staircase is probably reserved for use only by dignitaries, then as now (if at all).
The teak treads of the grand staircase are supported by slender concrete stringers.
There are no risers except for the carpet.
The wooden banisters are held up by widely-spaced balusters made of steel tubing.
In spite of its grand dimensions, the staircase looks light and airy.
(The current staircase is a faithful restoration of the original which collapsed when bombs hit the rooftop helicopter landing pad located directly above the stairwell.)
Photo by Megan Kearney.
A rare back view of the Reunification Palace as seen from the rear left corner.
At right is the base of the "T" housing the stairwell which has a helipad on its roof deck.
The first two floors of the three-storey building are 20 feet tall from floor to floor (or twice the normal height).
The public rooms of the Palace which are open to the hallways and the hallways themselves, have at least one long wall open to the outside letting in air and light.
This provides ample natural lighting and excellent cross-ventilation which make recourse to air-conditioning and artificial lighting infrequent, if not superfluous in the day time.
When we visited none of the rooms had any air-conditioning on, but some of the chandeliers and wall sconces were lit.
The cabinet conference room.
The Ceremonial Hall, one of the large reception rooms on the ground floor.
The bust of Ho Chi Minh and the flag are post-reunification additions.
Right: The main banquet hall.
The lacquer painting hanging on the wall is National Landscape painted in 1966 by Ngo Viet Thu, architect of the Independence Palace.
These rooms are still being used for official receptions, conferences, or private functions.
The presidential office, reception and ceremonial rooms are located on the second floor.
There is also a reception room for the vice president and a drawing room for the first lady.
These rooms are smaller than those on the ground floor but more opulently furnished.
There is also a movie theater on the second floor which can seat an audience of about 50.
The second floor has a similar floor plan as the first.
A corridor, with the sun-screened glass curtain wall to one side and the rooms on the other, stretches the entire length of the floor from landing to stairway landing.
The straightforward layout, minimalist design and white walls of the Palace interiors form a neutral, almost museum-like setting for the rich variety of furniture and furnishings it contains.
The details of the building itself lack ornamentation: unframed plate glass doors hung in plain, square-jointed timber doorways; plain white ceilings sans moldings, with narrow recesses where it meets the wall to conceal the drapery hardware; the operable metal framed glass windows of the curtain wall letting in both light and air.
Where trim is needed (e.g. to conceal exposed concrete beams), square-edged boards and battens of dark stained wood are used for contrast.
The president's diplomatic reception room.
It is also known as the "Credentials Presentation" room after the massive 40-panel lacquer painting depicting envoys presenting their credentials to the Vietnamese Le Dynasty monarch, which serve as the room's impressive backdrop.
Left, top: The "national reception" room where the president received visiting compatriots.
Right next to it (bottom left) is the "international reception" room for foreign visitors, where the presidential desk (partly seen) and chair sit on a low dais.
Right: The vice-president's reception room.
The president's office.
The landscape painting behind the desk is of Ninh Thuan, the hometown of President Nguyen Van Thieu.
Photo credit: wikimedia.org.
The Palace furniture and furnishings are more exotic than the building.
Oriental (Traditional Vietnamese, Classical Chinese, Japanese), French Provincial, as well as Contemporary (sixties) American design influences are well represented.
The color palette if not the motif changes from room to room.
Classical Chinese influence—the dominant "Chinese red" color scheme and the Confucian symbol (for prosperity) woven into the rug—is apparent in the presidential reception rooms.
The diplomatic reception room, on the other hand, is essentially Vietnamese with Buddhist overtones.
The materials and artisanry that went into the making of the Palace furnishings (apart from the obviously imported ones, e.g., chandeliers, carpets, conference chairs) are readily available in Vietnam.
Such as the silk in the damask and brocade fabrics used for drapery and upholstery, the porcelain vases, the exotic woods and lacquer finish of the furniture, as well as the requisite craftsmanship that goes into their making.
I don't know for a fact whether these were locally sourced or imported.
Above: Details of four paintings in the Independence Palace collection, clockwise from top left: 1) The Vietnam Quoc Tu painting at the Ceremonial Hall; 2) A painting inspired by the Vietnamese epic poem Truyen Kieu ("Tales of Kieu") by Nguyen Du; 3) National Landscape by Ngo Viet Thu; and 4) Ngoc Han Princess by Van Ba.
Left: Another detail from the Truyen Kieu painting.
Besides the building itself, the most attractive and culturally valuable artifacts in the Palace are probably its collection of murals and paintings.
The paintings are a mix of classic, traditional and contemporary styles, done in oil or lacquer by South Vietnamese artists including the building's renowned architect Ngo Viet Thu, who also painted the National Landscape which hangs in the main banquet hall.
Although almost all of the paintings were commissioned in 1966, they depict historical and folkloric figures pertaining to the Vietnamese nation as a whole, not just the South.
The dining area in the first lady's drawing room.
A modern cubist mural covers its end wall.
The third floor of the Palace was the president's residential quarters.
The presidential residence includes a study and library, the first lady's drawing room, a recreation room, and guest rooms occupying both wings of the top floor.
The spacious living areas of the residence looks even roomier being rather bare, uncluttered with bric-a-brac and personal effects.
The residence must have been left as it was when its former tenant departed.
(President Thieu resigned and fled the country on April 21, 1975 aboard a military transport plane, reportedly with 15 tons of luggage.)
Left: The president's study in a sprawling corner room on the third floor.
The furniture in the the president's study and recreation room are contemporary.
The leather upholstered arm chairs in the former have worn well style- and otherwise  The rec room (see below), on the other hand, has been characterized—cavalierly, in my view—as typical sixties kitsch.
Note also that the finish floor of the presidential quarters is linoleum.
Above: The first family's recreation room (top).
The rec room has a circular conversation area enclosed by vinyl-upholstered sectional sofas; laminated shelving in pastel colors against an end wall; leather upholstered rocking chairs at the sides; a barrel-shaped bar with fiberglass bar stools (bottom, left), and a gaming (mahjongg) table (bottom, right) in the corners.
Photos by Iso.
The presidential bedrooms are secluded from the rest of the residence in a penthouse overlooking a central courtyard.
In front of the courtyard is a covered patio originally designed as a place of meditation for the head of state.
President Thieu converted the patio into a disco with an elevated dance floor.
From here, one has a panoramic view of the 12-hectare palace grounds, the boulevard beyond the wrought iron gates of the palace compound, and the HCMC skyline.
The concrete roof deck of the palace building's wings on either side of the patio serve as outdoor terraces of the residence.
Behind the penthouse is a rooftop heliport where a vintage Huey (UH1H) helicopter is on permanent display.
The rooftop helipad is marked in two places where the bombs dropped by an undercover Viet Cong pilot serving in the South Vietnamese air force hit.
The bombs missed the presidential quarters, but probably hastened President Thieu's departure.
Down below, parked in the shade of the trees beside the elliptical drive way, are replicas of the two T-55 tanks of the NVA which led the assault on the Palace.
An American-made F-5 fighter-bomber similar to the one which bombed the Palace is also on display elsewhere in palace grounds.
Right, Top: A U.S. Army UH1H helicopter similar to the South Vietnamese presidential helicopter used by President Thieu.
The red markings on the helipad indicate where two bombs hit the palace, damaging the reinforced concrete roof deck and collapsing the central staircase underneath.
Right, bottom: A close-up of one of the red markings that appears to be hexagrams from afar.
It reads:
At 8:30 a.m. April
9th 1975, First Lieutenant
Pilot Nguyen Thanh Trung
flew F5E and threw down
two bombs at the right
target here.
A penthouse view of the NVA (PAVN) tanks (replicas) Nos. 390 and 843 that crashed the wrought iron gates of the Independence Palace on April 30, 1975 leading to its capture which ended the war and reunified the country.
The more intriguing part of the Reunification Palace tour for me was the basement.
The lower basement level served as a command post from where the president can control the disposition of the forces at his command.
The basement is a warren of war-rooms housing back-up generators and communications equipment (telephone switchboards, high-frequency radio, teletype, etc.), command posts, map rooms, and a "spare radio station."
The map room walls were covered with large-scale Vietnam War campaign maps.
The maps demarcate the military zones inside South Vietnamese territory.
There were also maps extending beyond the boundaries of South Vietnam particularly one depicting the notorious Ho Chi Minh Trail, the supply line and infiltration route of the NVA.
Above: Various types of military radio and telecommunications equipment in the Palace basement command center.
Below, Left: A single bed and night table with telephone hotlines in a basement room said to be the president's "combat duty bedroom."
Right: The Map Room.
At the upper basement level in what used to be the garage, an exhibit of reunification memorabilia and photos has been set up.
The more interesting photo exhibits were those documenting the surrender of the South Vietnamese authorities led by its third and last President, retired ARVN General Duong Van Minh.
General Minh was a leading member of the military junta which took over power from the assassinated Ngo Dinh Diem.
His stint as president lasted for only three days, as the crumbling South Vietnamese government scrambled to find a replacement to President Thieu who had resigned and fled the country.
The photo captions quote the following dialogue between General Minh and Colonel Bui Tin, the ranking PAVN officer who led the uncontested assault on the Palace:
General Minh: We have been waiting for you so that we could turn over the government.
Colonel Tin: There is no question of your transferring power.
Your power has crumbled.
You cannot give up what you do not have.
Among the memorabilia was the Viet Cong-NLF tricolor flag which flew atop the Palace on April 30, 1975, signaling its capture.
The medals, ribbons and insignias of General Nguyen Van Thieu, later to become Diem's successor as president are also on display.
Right, top: The Viet Cong-NLF flag which was raised up the Independence Palace flagpole on April 30, 1975.
Bottom: The medals, ribbons, and rank insignias of President Nguyen Van Thieu, when he was Chief of Staff of the ARVN.
Also shown are his presidential seals.
For all its dramatic impact on the visitor, the command center at the basement of the Palace was probably used as such only around the time of the American withdrawal in 1973, when the conflict in the South was "Vietnamized."
(Heretofore, command and control over the prosecution of the war was in American hands at the MACV Saigon headquarters.)
South Vietnamese command and control of the war effort couldn't have lasted for more than a few months, since the ARVN lost (and never recovered) the battlefield initiative to the Viet Cong and the NVA after the Americans withdrew in 1973.
By then, all arrows in the map room must have been pointing towards Saigon.
Neither willing to sustain nor inflict unnecessary casualties in a fratricidal conflict, the combined Viet Cong and NVA forces bided their time until Saigon and the Presidential Palace were ripe for the picking.
And so it came to pass on April 30, 1975.
The Independence Palace was commissioned and built in a time of war.
It was inaugurated and served as the presidential palace of an embattled country even as the war raged on.
That the Palace was built at all signified either "breathtaking folly" or symbolic defiance on the part of its builders who went on to lose the war.
The fact is, funds were available (for the most part, American military aid) and forthcoming since the powers that be who held the purse strings were neither accountable to the people nor their sponsors.
In hindsight, considering the alternative uses which the resources that went into the construction of the Palace could have been spent on, it is just as well that the Palace was built and survived the war relatively unscathed to become a magnificent trophy and then some.
It is rather apt that the Independence Palace has been renamed the "Reunification Palace."
Forty-four years on and counting since its inauguration in 1966, its role as Presidential Palace during the first 9 years of its existence is dwindling in significance.
During the period when it served as the official residence of the president of South Vietnam, the Palace arguably played no part in the making of contemporary Vietnamese history more significant than its capture on April 30, 1975, which erased South Vietnam from the map.
Built and occupied by self-proclaimed presidents (who had no legitimate mandate to govern, deriving their power to rule largely from the support of foreign sponsors) the Independence Palace then was neither "independent" nor "presidential."
The halls of the Reunification Palace in HCMC have long ceased to be the corridors of power in Vietnam.
It is obvious that the former presidential palace of a defunct separatist regime is being held up to the public as a trophy of sorts.
More to the point, it endures as a cultural icon of the Vietnamese nation, like the country's centuries-old temples and pagodas in Hanoi, Hue, and Saigon.
Built to shelter only a few, the Reunification Palace (which the New York Times has called "the sexiest building in Southeast Asia") has become one of the most visited places in Vietnam.
People, nationals and foreigners alike, not only can visit but also rent its halls to hold conferences, receptions, parties, and even to sleep over in the presidential bedrooms.
But then again, presidential palaces seem to hold no cachet for the Vietnamese.
The one in Hanoi was only used for rare diplomatic receptions by Ho Chi Minh who is more associated with the humble "President's House" where he lived and worked during his life-time presidency.
Power, it seems to me, abides elsewhere in Vietnam.