Feb
MAR
Apr
15
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
15 Mar 16 - 15 Mar 16
Close Help
HOME
TOURS
BOOK NOW
CUSTOMIZE MY ADVENTURE
DAY ADVENTURE
NIGHT ADVENTURE
i LOVE FOOD
SAIGON'S OTHER SIDE
CU CHI TUNNELS
MEKONG DELTA
MULTI-DAY COASTAL ADVENTURES
MUI NE (3 DAYS, 2 NIGHTS)
MUI NE, DA LAT & NHA TRANG (6 DAYS, 5 NIGHTS)
GALLERY
DAY ADVENTURES
NIGHT ADVENTURES
i LOVE FOOD
COMMUNITY
LOCAL MARKETS
The Countryside
Videos
COMMUNITY
FAQs
BLOG
ABOUT US
ABOUT US
ACCIDENTAL INSURANCE
CONTACT
Subscribe to blog Subscribe via RSS
i Tour Vietnam Blog
Check out some Adventurous Activities Vietnam has to offer.
Savor some famous Cuisine, and learn the Culture & History of Ho Chi Minh City!
Home
Home This is where you can find all the blog posts throughout the site.
Categories
Categories Displays a list of categories from this blog.
Tags
Tags Displays a list of tags that have been used in the blog.
Bloggers
Bloggers Search for your favorite blogger from this site.
Team Blogs
Team Blogs Find your favorite team blogs here.
Search
Login
Login Login form
Username Register
Password Forgot Password?
Remember me
Login
REUNIFICATION PALACE IN SAIGON
by Hao in Activities & Attractions
Font size: Larger Smaller
Hits: 5142
0 Comments
Subscribe to this entry
Print
Bookmark |
15
Jun
5142
0
Location: 135 Nam Kì Khởi Nghĩa Street, Bến Thành, Ho Chi Minh City
Hours: 7:30 AM - 11 AM and 1 PM - 4 PM
Admission: 30,000 VND
The Reunification Palace is not only an attraction but also a symbolic representation of its strength that withstood great historical revolutions.
Formerly, this place was known as the Independence Palace.
Today it continues to be a tourist hotspot.
Travelers come to understand more about the war and how the Vietnameses achieved their independence, as well as to know more about their culture.
During the Colonial Era when France ruled Southern Vietnam (also known as Cochinchina), then Governor Lagrandière commissioned a brand new stone building to replace the wooden palace in 1863.
This movement meant to solidify French presence in the new colony.
The new establishment would later be known as Norodom Palace - French colonial headquarters in Saigon - in 1873 when construction was complete.
The governors of Cochinchina used the palace as a place of residence and work.
It was also nicknamed the Governor’s Palace.
Additionally, Japan also based its headquarters there during World War II.
However, their victory was short-lived when Japan surrendered to Allied forces.
Most infamously, the Reunification Palace replaced the former site of the Norodom Palace after World War II.
France surrendered to the Việt Minh communists on 7 May 1954 and signed the Geneva Accords.
The agreement stated that the 17th Parallel would divide the country between north and south for two years.
Vièt Minh communists controlled north Vietnam while anti-communists controlled south Vietnam.
Norodom Palace was given to Prime Minister Ngô Đình Diệm.
When Diệm defeated the emperor, he declared himself as president to the Republic of Vietnam.
Although Diệm had authority over the government, he was not favored amongst his citizens.
In 1962 his own air force had an unsuccessful assassination attempt on him.
The bomb was said to have dropped in the same room as he was during that moment but it had failed to detonate.
Diệm commanded a new residence be built with an addition to an underground bomb shelter in the basement.
Unfortunately he would never see the completed structure because he was killed in 1963.
Diệm’s proposed infrasture was known as the Independence Palace.
Architect Ngô Viết Thụ implemented the design for the palace.
The architecture is a balance blend of both traditional and modern aspects.
It was home to the successive South Vietnamese President Ngyễn Văn Thiệu until his departure from office in 1975.
Amid Thiệu’s reign, the Independence Palace was South Vietnam’s government headquarters during the Vietnam War.
Nevertheless, on 30 April 1975, South Vietnam was seized by North Vietnam’s military forces.
North Vietnamese army crashed through the iron gates of the Independence Palace.
This marked the finale of the Vietnamese War.
The Provisional Revolutionary Government renamed the place to the Reunification Palace in November 1975 after reaching an agreement between both North and South Vietnamese.
There are many rooms here, like the “National Security Council Chamber,” “Ambassadors Chamber,” “President Reception Salon,” and “Conference Hall.”
Additionally, tanks, cars, maps, and weapons displayed have become historical artifacts.
It is a reminder of Vietnam’s resilience to fight for its freedom and independence.
Moreover, you should not miss replicas of the two tanks (843 and 390) that crashed the palace’s iron gates at 11:30 AM from 30 April 1975.
The Reunification Palace is a symbol of Ho Chi Minh City, a place that you should visit if you want to know more about the Vietnam War.
There are both English and French-speaking tour guides upon request at the information desk.
Author: Anh Ly
1
Tagged in: Attractions Ho Chi Minh City Reunification Palace Saigon Tours
Saigon Central Post Office
Bến Thành market
Related Posts
Trackbacks
Saigon Central Post Office - Activities & Attractions May 26
Bến Thành market - Uncategorized Jun 25
Vietnamese Tropical Fruits - Food & Drinks Jul 22
Vietnamese Transportation - Travel Tips & Info Aug 16
Must see infographics about south east asia!
- Miscellaneous Feb 11
Trackback URL for this blog entry.
Hao
Hao has not set their biography yet
View author's profile
Show more posts from author
Subscribe to updates from author
Author's recent posts
Must see infographics about south east asia!
- Miscellaneous Feb 11
Watch this If you're still traveling with a suitcase!
- Travel Tips & Info Sep 03
Bánh Mì: The Best Street Food - Food & Drinks Aug 16
Comments
No comments made yet.
Be the first to submit a comment
Leave your comment
Guest Tuesday, 15 March 2016
Subscribe to this entry                (Please fill in your email address to subscribe to blog updates.)
Blog List
Blog Categories
Vietnam
Travel Tips & Info
Shopping
Miscellaneous
Food & Drinks
Culture
Beaches
Activities & Attractions
Subscribe
Your Name:
Your Email:
Subscribe Now
Tag Cloud
Security Temples Attractions Hotcakes Shrimp Ho Chi Minh City Attraction Motorbike Banh Xeo Grill Pho Bo Banh Mi Central Post Office Beaches Soup Broken Rice top dishes Tips Guide BBQ Tours Pagoda Food Beef Noodles Saigon Banh Loc Shopping Sightsee bridge Vietnam Northern Noodles Places to visit Ben Thanh motorbike tour Cuisine motorbikes Theft Culture things to try Pho Bac Fruits Reunification Palace Travels Restaurant Food Tour Com Tam street food Cakes special dishes Seafood subs Pho Airport
Take a ride
Actions speak louder than words.
At i Tour Vietnam, it is our mission to help our neighbors.
We advocate for social responsibility and strive for optimistic goals in providing relief for the underprivileged.
It is our promise that for every tour booked, i Tour will donate one t-shirt, feed one meal, or provide a new set of school supplies to orphaned children, or even be earth friendly by planting a tree.
Travelers will have the option to choose which charity they would like to contribute to.
Not only does i Tour become an adventure, it is also part of a rewarding journey.
ABOUT i TOUR
Specializing in:
Tours in Vietnam
Shore Excursions
100% Customer Satisfaction
Custom Tours
Private Tours
Contact Us
i Tour Vietnam Ltd.
International +84 986188801
Local 0986188801 (English)
info@itourvn.com
Stay Connected
Facebook      Blog
© 2013-2016 i Tour Vietnam | All Rights Reserved | info@itourvn.com