ARTICLE: James Madison's Celebrated Report of 1800: The Transformation of the Tenth Amendment
May
JUN
Jul
11
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
11 Jun 16 - 11 Jun 16
Close Help
Skip over navigation
Browse Law Reviews and Treatises
Skip over navigation
Sign in with your lexis.com® ID to access the full text of this article.
-OR-
Order the full text of this article if you do not have a lexis.com® ID.
 
Price: 
US $22.00 (+ tax)
Yahoo!® Currency Converter
 
 
Subject to Terms & Conditions
Copyright (c) 2006 The George Washington Law Review
The George Washington Law Review
ARTICLE: James Madison's Celebrated Report of 1800: The Transformation of the Tenth Amendment
February, 2006
74 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 165
Author
Kurt T. Lash*
Excerpt
Introduction
 
It has become commonplace to describe the Rehnquist Court as having staged a "federalism revolution." 1 Although the current status of the revolution is in dispute, 2 historical treatment of the Supreme Court's jurisprudence under Chief Justice Rehnquist no doubt will emphasize a resurgence of federalism and limited construction of federal power. 3 Cases like Gregory v. Ashcroft, 4 New York v. United States, 5 United States v. Lopez, 6 Printz v. United States, 7 Alden v. Maine, 8 and United States v. Morrison 9 all share a common rule of interpretation: narrow construction of federal power to interfere with matters believed best left under state control. 10
The textual hook for this rule of strict construction has been the Tenth Amendment. 11 As Justice O'Connor wrote in the seminal federalism revolution case, Gregory v. Ashcroft:
 
The Constitution created a Federal Government of limited powers. The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people. The States thus retain substantial sovereign authority under our constitutional system. As James Madison put it:
The powers delegated by the proposed Constitution to the federal government are few and defined. Those which are to remain in the State governments are numerous and indefinite... . The powers reserved to the several States will extend to all the objects which, in the ordinary course of affairs, concern the lives, liberties, and properties of the people, ...
 
 
If you are interested in obtaining a lexis.com® ID and Password, please contact us at 1-(800)-227-4908 or visit us at http://www.lexisnexis.com/ .
Search Documents
 
eg., Environmental Insurance Coverage Under the Comprehensive General Liability Policy
See Related Content
 
Lexis® Web - Beta
 
 
 
Lexis® Web - The only search engine that delivers free web content specifically from legal sites validated by LexisNexis® attorney editors and includes tools for faster research and more relevant results.
 
 
LexisNexis® Products
 
LexisNexis® Services at www.lexis.com
LexisNexis® Store
LexisNexis® Web Communities
 
 
Terms & Conditions | Privacy Policy | Copyright © 2016 LexisNexis, a division of Reed Elsevier, Inc. All rights reserved.