SEP
JUN
SEP
11
2015
2016
2017
22 captures
7 Feb 13 - 15 Sep 16
Close Help
Publius-Huldah's Blog
Understanding the Constitution
Home
About
Article V
Ask Questions!
Comment Policy
Contact
Daily Commentary
Nullification: The Original Right of Self-Defense
By Publius Huldah
What did our Framers really say we must do when the federal government usurps power?
They never said, “When the federal government ignores the Constitution, amend the Constitution”.
They never said, “File a lawsuit and let federal judges decide.”
Instead, they advised two manly remedies.
We’ll look at one of them – nullification – in this paper.
1
First, let’s look at the Constitution we have.
Our Federal Government has Enumerated Powers Only
With our federal Constitution, we created a federal government.
It is:
A federation of sovereign States united under a national government ONLY for those limited purposes itemized in the Constitution;
With all other powers reserved by the States or the People.
We listed every power we delegated to the federal government: Most of the powers delegated over the Country at large are listed at Article I, §8, clauses 1-16.
All our Constitution authorizes the federal government to do over the Country at large falls into four categories:
Military defense, international commerce & relations;
Immigration & naturalization;
Domestically, create a uniform commercial system: weights & measures, patents & copyrights, money based on gold & silver, bankruptcy laws, mail delivery & some road building; and
With some of the amendments, secure certain civil rights.
That’s basically it!
All other powers are reserved by the States or the People.
Depending on how you count, Congress only has 18-21 powers over the Country at Large.
2
It is only with respect to the enumerated powers listed in the Constitution that the federal government has lawful authority.
If it’s on the list, Congress may make laws about it.
But if it’s NOT on the list, Congress usurps power & acts unlawfully when it interferes.
Is “education” on the list of delegated powers?
Raising children?
Health Care?
Environmental regulation?
Is most of what they do on the list?
Since these are not delegated powers listed in our Constitution, the federal government usurps power and acts unlawfully when it meddles.
So then, what do we do when the federal government usurps powers not on the list?
Don’t Submit to Unconstitutional Laws – Nullify Them!
3
Our Framers said the federal government is our “creature” and must obey our Will as enshrined in our Constitution.
And when it doesn’t, we must defend the Constitution by invoking our natural right of self-defense:
Alexander Hamilton said in Federalist No. 28 (last 5 paras): [I’m condensing]
“If the representatives of the people betray their constituents, there is no recourse left but in the exertion of that original right of self-defense which is paramount to all positive forms of government, and which against the usurpations of the national rulers, may be exerted … [by] … State governments [which] will … afford complete security against invasions of the public liberty by the national authority…” [emphasis mine]
Hamilton says in Federalist No. 33 (5th para):
“If the federal government should overpass the just bounds of its authority and make a tyrannical use of its powers, the people, whose creature it is, must appeal to the standard they have formed, and take such measures to redress the injury done to the Constitution as the exigency may suggest and prudence justify.”
[emphasis mine]
Thomas Jefferson said in his draft of The Kentucky Resolutions of 1798 , 8th Resolution:
“…where powers are assumed which have not been delegated, a nullification of the act is the rightful remedy: that every State has a natural right in cases not within the compact … to nullify of their own authority all assumptions of power by others within their limits: that without this right, they would be under the dominion, absolute and unlimited, of whosoever might exercise this right of judgment for them…” [emphasis mine]
James Madison commented on this in his Notes on Nullification (1834) :
“… the right of nullification meant by Mr. Jefferson is the natural right, which all admit to be a remedy against insupportable oppression…” [emphasis mine]
Note that Hamilton, Jefferson, and Madison said nullification is a natural right – it is NOT a “constitutional right”.
Rights don’t come from the Constitution – they come from God.
4
HERE is Madison’s “Report of 1799-1800 on the Virginia Resolutions”.
He said under his discussion of the 3rd Resolution [I’m condensing]:
The States, in their sovereign capacity, are the parties to the constitutional compact; and are thus the final authority on whether the federal government has violated the Constitution.
There can be no tribunal above the authority of the States to decide whether the compact made by them has been violated by the federal government.
(p 192)
That if, when the federal government usurps power, the States don’t stop the usurpation, and thereby preserve the Constitution; there would be no relief from usurped power.
This would subvert the Rights of the People as well as betray the fundamental principle of our Founding.
(p195)
That the Judicial Branch is as likely to usurp as are the other two Branches.
Thus, the Sovereign States have as much right to judge the usurpations of the Judicial Branch as they do the Legislative and Executive Branches.
(p196)
That all 3 Branches of the federal government obtain their delegated powers from the Constitution; and they may not annul the authority of the States.
And if the Judicial Branch connives with other Branches in usurping powers, our Constitution will be destroyed.
(p196)
So the Judicial Branch does not have final say as to the rights of the parties to the constitutional compact.
Otherwise, the delegation of judicial power would annul the authority delegating it; and the concurrence of the judicial branch with the other branches in usurping powers, would subvert the Constitution forever.
(p196)
In Federalist No. 46 , Madison says, respecting unconstitutional acts of the federal government:
The People can refuse to cooperate with federal officers [7th para];
State officials can oppose the feds [7th para];
State Legislatures can invent legislative devices to impede & obstruct the federal government [7th para];
States can cooperate in concerted plans of resistance [8th para];
States can easily defeat the federal government’s schemes of usurpation [10th para]; and as the last resort,
States must defend themselves from the federal government – that’s why the People are armed.
So Jefferson, Hamilton and Madison tell us: When the federal government asks or directs States to do things which aren’t on the list, the proper response is, “No!”
State Governments Must Man Up and Preserve our Constitution.
The Declaration of Independence says at the 7th para that the colonials “opposed with manly firmness” the King’s “invasions on the rights of the people”.
We need today that same manly opposition to tyranny.
And we are starting to see some: The Tenth Amendment Center says over 200 bills have been filed this year in State Legislatures to nullify unconstitutional acts of the federal government.
E.g.:
To allow terminally ill people access to experimental drugs & medical treatments despite FDA rules – drugs & medical treatments are not on the list!
And the 10th Amendment didn’t stop them from usurping powers in this area.
Deny resources and assistance to the National Security Agency – spying on us is not on the list!
And the 4th Amendment didn’t stop them from spying on us!
Nullify federal bans on growing hemp & marijuana.
Agriculture and drugs are not on the list!
And the 10th Amendment didn’t stop them from usurping powers in this area.
An Indiana Legislator filed a bill to nullify all federal EPA Regulations – environmental protection is not on the list!
And the 10th Amendment didn’t stop them from usurping power over the environment.
Disarming the American People: If Congress by law, or the President by executive order, or the BATF by rule, or the supreme Court by opinion, or the federal government by UN Treaty, orders The People to turn in our arms, We must refuse to comply.
The Constitution doesn’t authorize the federal government to disarm us.
Gun control is not on the list!
And the 2nd Amendment didn’t stop them from regulating ammunition, firearms, and firearms dealers.
Accordingly, States should pass laws directing their firearms and ammo dealers to ignore all federal dictates which pretend to restrict arms, firearms, ammo, and sales of same.
The Law should also provide that the State Attorney General will defend any Citizen of the State from unlawful acts committed against him by agents of the federal government attempting to enforce unconstitutional federal dictates within the borders of the State.
Prayer in the Public Schools: When, in 1962, the US supreme Court began its war against Christianity by banning prayers in the public schools , State legislatures should have passed laws directing their public schools to ignore the unconstitutional opinion of the supreme Court.
“Religion”, “prayers”, and “public schools” are not on the list of delegated powers.
And the 1st Amendment didn’t stop them from “prohibiting the free exercise of religion”.
Brave Citizens Must Man up Also.
As noted above, Madison says in Federalist No. 46 that the People can refuse to cooperate with federal officers.
Rosa Parks & Martin Luther King showed us spine 50 years ago when they nullified the State & local Jim Crow laws by refusing to obey those unconstitutional laws.
Recently in Connecticut, Citizens refused to obey an unconstitutional State law which pretends to require them to register their firearms.
Art.
I, §15, CT Constitution says:
“Every citizen has a right to bear arms in defense of himself and the state.”
If you are a “Citizen”, you have the right to bear arms – that’s all you need in Connecticut.
So the Connecticut Statute making it a felony to possess guns which are not registered is unconstitutional as in violation of Art.
I, § 15 of the State Constitution.
And The People – as the creators of the State government – are the ones to ultimately decide!
All nullification requires is a spine.
And Rosa Parks & MLK showed us what spine looks like: You say, “No more!”
The “we lost the civil war” objection to Nullification.
Those who chant this objection seem to have in mind the “nullification crisis of 1832”.
Let’s debunk it:
The southern States were agricultural.
They bought manufactured goods from England.
England bought southern cotton.
Infant industries in the North East were producing some of the same manufactured goods as England; but because they were more expensive than the imports, they couldn’t compete.
So in 1828, Congress imposed a high tariff on the imports.
The Southern States called this the “tariff of abominations”, because it made the English goods too expensive to buy; and when the Southern States stopped buying English goods, England stopped buying Southern cotton.
This devastated the Southern economy.
Note that Congress has specific authority to impose tariffs on imports: Art.
I, § 8, cl.
1.
So the Tariff Act of 1828 was constitutional.
The nullification crisis of 1832 was brought on because S. Carolina wanted to “nullify” the Tariff Act of 1828 – a constitutional law!
South Carolina developed a bizarre theory that
A State has a “constitutional right” to nullify any federal law; and
The nullification is presumed valid unless ¾ of the States say it isn’t valid.
In James Madison’s Notes on Nullification (1834) , he discussed and debunked S. Carolina’s theory.
He said:
The federal government has delegated authority to impose tariffs;
The Constitution requires that tariffs be uniform throughout the United States;
States can’t nullify tariffs authorized by the Constitution;
¼ of the States don’t have the right to dictate to ¾ of the States on matters within the powers delegated to the federal government; and
Nullification is not a constitutional right.
Near the end of his Notes, Madison quoted Thomas Jefferson’s famous statement:
“…but where powers are assumed which have not been delegated, a nullification of the act is the rightful remedy: that every State has a natural right in cases not within the compact …to nullify of their own authority all assumptions of power by others within their limits …” [emphasis mine]
Madison then says:
“Thus the right of nullification meant by Mr. Jefferson is the natural right, which all admit to be a remedy against insupportable oppression.”
[emphasis mine]
Do you see?
Madison’s points are:
States may not properly nullify constitutional acts of the federal government; and
When an act of the federal government is unconstitutional, nullification is a NATURAL RIGHT – not a “constitutional right”.
5
Start Doing YOUR Duty
Your Duty is to read our Declaration of Independence and Constitution and learn The List of Enumerated Powers.
YOU were supposed to enforce the Constitution with your votes.
But instead of supporting only candidates who knew and obeyed our Constitution, you abdicated your Responsibility and voted for candidates who told you what you wanted to hear.
For the Sake of your Country and Posterity, you must also renounce cowardice and appeasement as the response to evil.
If you fail us, hell on Earth is just around the corner.
Endnotes:
1 The other Remedy is to elect faithful representatives.
At the Virginia Ratifying Convention on June 20, 1788 at [223], James Madison said our Constitution depends on the people having the “virtue and intelligence to select men of virtue and wisdom” to office.
In Federalist No. 44 [12th para from end], he says when Congress usurps powers, and the executive and judiciary departments go along with it,
“…a remedy must be obtained from the people who can, by the election of more faithful representatives, annul the acts of the usurpers…” [emphasis mine]
We must start electing candidates who know the Constitution!
2 THIS Chart lists the enumerated powers over the Country at Large and illustrates how Principles in our Declaration of Independence were implemented in our Constitution.
3 Stop quibbling over terminology.
As a People, we have lost the ability to think conceptually.
When some don’t see the word, “nullification”, in a writing, they insist the writer didn’t support it.
But the concept is refusal to submit to unconstitutional laws.
You can call it “non-violent civil disobedience”, “that original right of self-defense”, “resistance”, “refusal to obey”, “impeding & obstructing”, “nullification”, “interposition”, or something else.
I use “nullification” because the term has a distinctive meaning and was used by our beloved Thomas Jefferson.
You may call broccoli “broccoli”, a “green vegetable”, a “cruciferous vegetable”, a “super food”, or “little trees”.
But “broccoli” is the most precise and distinctive term.
Do you see?
4 So when Michael Farris, and others who tell us a convention is the only way out, disparage nullification as an “extra-constitutional doctrine”, the proper response is: Nullification is NOT a “constitutional right or remedy” – it is that NATURAL RIGHT of self-defense which pre-dates and pre-exists the Constitution.
Farris has repudiated our Founding Principles that Rights come from the Creator God, and that the purpose of government is to secure the Rights GOD gave us (Declaration of Independence, 2nd para).
In Farris’ brave new world, “rights” come from the Constitution – where they are subject to the will of human governments.
See, e.g., his so-called “parental rights” amendment HERE .
“Child raising” is not now on the list of delegated powers – but §3 of Farris’ “parental rights” amendment would delegate power over children to the federal government.
Read it.
5 Rights don’t come from the Constitution!
They come from GOD!
PH
May 3, 2015
Share this:
Tweet
Share on Tumblr
Pocket
Email
More
Like this:
Like Loading...
May 3, 2015 Posted by Publius Huldah | Jim Crow laws , Kentucky Resolutions of 1798 , Madison's Notes on Nullification (1834) , Madison's Report on the Virginia Resolutions (1799-1800) , Martin Luther King , Nullification , nullification deniers , South Carolina nullification crisis , Tariff of Abominations , Tarrif Act of 1828 | Alexander Hamilton , cowardice and appeasement , Federalist Paper No. 46 , James Madison , Jim Crow laws , Kentucky Resolutions , Madison's Notes on Nullification (1834) , Madison’s Report of 1799-1800 on the Virginia Resolutions , Martin Luther King , Natural Rights , Nullification , nullification by States , Nullification Crisis of 1832 , prayer in the public schools , Rights , Rosa Parks , Tariff Act of 1828 , Thomas Jefferson | 21 Comments
James Madison Rebukes Nullification Deniers
By Publius Huldah
This is The Age of Ignorance.
Our “intellectuals” can’t think.
Our “scholars” parrot each other.
The self-educated fixate on idiotic theories.
Our People despise Truth and disseminate lies.
Nullification deniers such as Matthew Spalding of Heritage Foundation , Jarrett Stepman of Human Events , law professor Randy Barnett ,  David Barton of Wallbuilders, and history professor Allen C. Guelzo , say that nullification by States of unconstitutional acts of the federal government is unlawful and impossible.
They make the demonstrably false assertions that:
♦  States don’t have the right to nullify unconstitutional acts of the federal   government because our Constitution doesn’t say they can do it;
♦  Nullification is literally impossible;
♦ The supreme Court is the final authority on what is constitutional and what is not; and The States and The People must submit to whatever the supreme Court says; and
♦ James Madison, Father of Our Constitution, opposed nullification.
Their assertions contradict our Declaration of Independence, The Federalist Papers, our federal Constitution, and what James Madison, Thomas Jefferson, and Alexander Hamilton really said.
What are the Two Conditions Precedent for Nullification?
The deniers seem unaware of the two conditions our Framers saw must be present before nullification is proper and possible.
These conditions are important – you will see why!
:
♦ The act of the federal government must be unconstitutional –  usually a usurpation of a power not delegated to the federal government in the Constitution; and
♦ The act must be something The States or The People can “nullify”- i.e., refuse to obey (the act must order them to do something or not do something), or otherwise thwart, impede, or hinder.
What is “Interposition” and What is “Nullification”?
A State “interposes” when it stands between the federal government and The Citizens of the State in order to protect them from the federal government.
Interposition takes various forms, depending on the circumstances.
Hamilton refers to interposition in Federalist No. 33 (5th para):
“If the federal government should overpass the just bounds of its authority and make a tyrannical use of its powers, the people, whose creature it is, must appeal to the standard [the Constitution] they have formed, and take such measures to redress the injury done to the Constitution as the exigency may suggest and prudence justify.”
[emphasis mine]
“Nullification” is merely one form of interposition.
Here are three highly relevant illustrations:
♠ When the act of the federal government is unconstitutional and orders The States or The People to do – or not do – something, nullification by direct disobedience is the proper form of interposition.
♠ When the act of the federal government is unconstitutional, but doesn’t order The States or The People to do – or not do – something (the alien & sedition acts), The States may take various measures to thwart, impede, or hinder implementation of the federal act in order to protect The Member States, The People, and The Constitution from federal tyranny.
(See the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions of 1798.)
♠ When the act of the federal government is constitutional, but unjust (the Tariff Act of 1828), the States may not nullify it; but may interpose by objecting and trying to get the Tariff Act changed.
Our Founding Principles in a Nutshell
In order to understand The Right of Nullification, one must also learn the Founding Principles set forth in The Declaration of Independence (2nd para).
Then one can see that “when powers are assumed which have not been delegated, a nullification of the act” 1 is “the natural right, which all admit to be a remedy against insupportable oppression.”
2 These Principles are:
1.
Rights come from God;
2.
People create governments;
3.
The purpose of government is to secure the rights God gave us; and
4.
When a government We created seeks to take away our God given rights, We have the Right – We have the Duty – to alter, abolish, or throw off such government.
Let us look briefly at these Principles:
1.
Our Declaration of Independence (2nd para) recognizes that God is the grantor of Rights.
So Rights don’t come from the Constitution, the supreme Court or the federal government .
2.
The Preamble to our Constitution shows that WE THE PEOPLE created the federal government.
It is our “creature”.
Alexander Hamilton says this in Federalist Paper No. 33 (5th para); and Thomas Jefferson, in his draft of The Kentucky Resolutions of 1798 (8th Resolution).
As our “creature”, it may lawfully do only what WE authorized it to do in our Constitution.
We created a “federal” government: An alliance of Sovereign States 3 associated in a “federation” with a national government to which is delegated supremacy over the States in few and defined areas only.
James Madison says in Federalist No. 45 (9th para):
“The powers delegated by the proposed Constitution to the federal government are few and defined.
Those which are to remain in the State governments are numerous and indefinite.
The former will be exercised principally on external objects, as war, peace, negotiation, and foreign commerce; with which last the power of taxation will, for the most part, be connected.
The powers reserved to the several States will extend to all the objects which … concern the lives, liberties, and properties of the people, and the internal order, improvement, and prosperity of the State.”
[boldface mine]
Do you see?
We delegated only “few and defined” powers to the federal government.
These are the “enumerated powers” listed in the Constitution.
4
These enumerated powers concern:
♦ Military defense, international commerce & relations;
♦ Control of immigration and naturalization of new citizens;
♦ Creation of a uniform commercial system: Weights & measures, patents & copyrights, money based on gold & silver, bankruptcy laws, mail delivery & some road building; and
♦ With some of the Amendments, protect certain civil rights.
It is only with respect to the “enumerated powers” that the federal government has lawful authority over the Country at large!!!
All other powers are “reserved to the several States” and The People.
3.
Our Constitution authorizes the federal government to secure our God-given Rights in the following ways: 5
It is to secure our rights to life and liberty by:
♦ Military defense (Art.
I, Sec.
8, cl.
11-16);
♦ Laws against piracy and other felonies committed on the high seas (Art.
I, Sec.
8, cl.
10);
♦ Protecting us from invasion (Art IV, Sec.
4);
♦ Prosecuting traitors (Art III, Sec.
3); and
♦ Restrictive immigration policies (Art.
I, Sec.
9, cl.
1).
It is to secure our property rights by:
♦ Regulating trade & commerce so we can produce, sell & prosper (Art.
I, Sec.
8, cl.3).
The original intent of the interstate commerce clause is to prohibit States from levying tolls & taxes on articles of commerce as they are transported thru the States for buying & selling.
♦ Establishing uniform weights & measures and a money system based on gold & silver (Art I, Sec.
8, cl.
5) – inflation via paper currency & fractional reserve lending is theft!
♦ Punishing counterfeiters (Art I, Sec.
8, cl.
6);
♦ Making bankruptcy laws to permit the orderly dissolution or reorganization of debtors’ estates with fair treatment of creditors (Art I, Sec 8, cl.
4); and
♦ Issuing patents & copyrights to protect ownership of intellectual labors (Art I, Sec 8, cl 8).
It is to secure our right to liberty by:
♦ Laws against slavery (13th Amendment);
♦ Providing fair trials in federal courts (4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th Amendments); and
♦ Obeying the Constitution!
This is how our federal Constitution implements The Founding Principle that the purpose of government is to secure the rights God gave us!
4.
The fourth Founding Principle in our Declaration is this: When government takes away our God given rights, We have the Right & the Duty to alter, abolish, or throw off such government.
Nullification is thus a natural right of self-defense:
Thomas Jefferson said:
“… but where powers are assumed which have not been delegated, a nullification of the act is the rightful remedy: that every State has a natural right in cases not within the compact, (casus non foederis,) to nullify of their own authority all assumptions of power by others within their limits: that without this right, they would be under the dominion, absolute and unlimited, of whosoever might exercise this right of judgment for them…” 6 [boldface mine]
James Madison commented on the above:
“… the right of nullification meant by Mr. Jefferson is the natural right, which all admit to be a remedy against insupportable oppression…” 7
Alexander Hamilton says in Federalist No. 28  (5th para from end):
“If the representatives of the people betray their constituents, there is then no resource left but in the exertion of that original right of self-defense which is paramount to all positive forms of government, and which against the usurpations of the national rulers, may be exerted with infinitely better prospect of success …” [boldface mine]
Hamilton then shows how The States can rein in a usurping federal government:
“…the State governments will, in all possible contingencies, afford complete security against invasions of the public liberty by the national authority…”
Do you see?
But the nullification deniers do not see because, in addition to their apparent unfamiliarity with the original source writings on nullification (as well as The Federalist Papers), they reject, or do not understand, the Founding Principle that Rights pre-date & pre-exist the Constitution and come from God.
Nullification is not a paltry “constitutional right”!
It has a hallowed status – it is that natural right of self-defense which pre-dates & pre-exists the Constitution.
Now, let us look at the false assertions made by the nullification deniers.
False Assertion 1:
That States can’t nullify unconstitutional acts of the federal government because the Constitution doesn’t say they can do it.
♣  As we have just seen, Jefferson, Madison, and Hamilton saw nullification of unconstitutional acts of the federal government as a “natural right” – not a “constitutional right”.
And since Rights come from God, there is no such thing as a “constitutional right”!
♣ The Right of Nullification, transcending as it does, the Constitution; and being nowhere prohibited by the Constitution to the States, is a reserved power.
The 10th Amendment says:
“The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.”
Nothing in the federal Constitution prohibits The States from nullifying unconstitutional acts of the federal government.
Thus, nullification is a reserved  power of the States & The People.
♣  We saw where Madison says in Federalist No. 45 that the powers delegated to the federal government are “few and defined”, and all other powers are “reserved to the several States”.
Thus, it is the federal government which is supposed to look to the Constitution for the list of “enumerated powers” We The People delegated to it.
The States don’t go to the Constitution to look for permission because they retain all powers they didn’t exclusively 8 delegate to the federal government, or prohibit by Art.
I, Sec.
10.
The nullification deniers have it backwards:  They permit the federal government to ignore the “enumerated powers” limitations set forth in the Constitution; but insist The States can’t do anything unless the Constitution specifically says they can!
Do you see how they pervert Our Constitution?
False Assertion 2:
That Nullification is literally impossible.
We saw above the two conditions which must exist before nullification is proper and possible:
♦ The act of the federal government must be unconstitutional, and
♦ The act must be something The People or The States can refuse to obey, or otherwise thwart, impede or obstruct.
Here are examples of unconstitutional federal acts the States can and should nullify:
The Constitution does not delegate to the federal government power to ban Christianity from the public square.
But in 1962, the supreme Court first ordered The States to stop prayers in the public schools.
That Court next banned the Ten Commandments from the public schools.
Since those orders were usurpations of powers not lawfully possessed by the Court ,the States should have nullified them by directing their Schools to ignore them.
If Congress by “law”, or the President by “executive order”, orders The People to turn in our guns, We must refuse to comply.
The Constitution doesn’t authorize the federal government to disarm us.
So, The States and The People must nullify such law or order by refusing to obey.
Here are examples of unconstitutional & unjust State and municipal laws Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King nullified :
The Jim Crow laws required black people to sit at the back of the bus, and prohibited them from eating in public places and using public restrooms, water fountains, park benches, etc.
Using non-violent civil disobedience, Rosa Parks and MLK led black people to refuse to obey these unjust and unconstitutional (Sec.
1, 14th Amdt.)
laws.
This was nullification by brave Citizens!
Now, I’ll show you unconstitutional acts which couldn’t be directly disobeyed because they weren’t directed to anything The States or The People could refuse to obey:
In 1798, Thomas Jefferson wrote The Kentucky Resolutions, and James Madison wrote The Virginia Resolutions.
These Resolutions objected to laws made by Congress which purported to grant to the President dictatorial powers over aliens and seditious words.
Kentucky and Virginia could object, but they couldn’t prevent the President from enforcing the alien & sedition acts, because the President had the raw power to send out thugs to arrest aliens or people who had spoken or written “seditious” words; and then to persecute them.
So Jefferson and Madison showed why the alien & sedition acts were unconstitutional, protested them, and asked other States to join the protest and take whatever measures needed to be taken to protect The States, The People, and The Constitution.
Now!
Note Well:  Randy Barnett, law professor , and other deniers crow that the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions prove there is no “literal power” of nullification in the States.
But Barnett should know better because he is a lawyer.
Every litigation attorney knows this:  At a motion hearing before the judge, opposing counsel whips out a court opinion which he cites as authority for a legal point.
He gives the judge a highlighted copy and gives you (opposing counsel) an un-highlighted copy.
While he is making his argument to the judge, you must listen to what he is saying, and at the same time, read the opinion and develop an argument which “distinguishes” the opinion opposing counsel is using from the case at bar.
When opposing counsel finishes, the judge looks at you and says, “And how do you respond?”
You must be ready with your argument right then.
Are we to believe that Randy Barnett, law professor, sitting in his ivory tower and under no pressure, is unable to distinguish between situations where a State does have a “literal power” to nullify (by direct disobedience) an unconstitutional act of the federal government [when it orders The State or The People to do -or not do – something]; and when The State does not have a “literal power” to directly disobey the act [because, as with the alien & sedition acts, it does  not dictate something The States or The People can refuse to obey], and so they can only thwart, impede & obstruct the unconstitutional act?
False Assertion 3:
That the supreme Court is the final authority on what is constitutional and what is not; and The States and The People must submit to whatever the supreme Court says.
The federal government has become a tyranny which acts without constitutional authority.
This came about because we were lured away from The Founding Principle that the purpose of government is to secure the Rights God gave us; and were seduced into believing government should provide for our needs and protect us from the challenges of Life.
Progressives of the early 1900s 9 transformed the federal government into the Frankensteinian monster it is today.
They imposed the regulatory welfare state where the federal government regulates business and commerce, natural resources, human resources, and benefits some people [e.g., welfare parasites, labor unions & obama donors] at the expense of others.
The Progressives claimed the power to determine what is in the “public interest” and have the federal government implement their notions of what advances the “public interest”.
Under the Progressives, the federal government was no longer limited by the enumerated powers delegated in the Constitution; but would follow the “will of the people” as expressed by their representatives in the federal government.
In other words, the Progressives gave the federal government a blank check to fill out anyway they want.
People in the federal government now claim power to do whatever they want to us.
The federal government imposed by the Progressives is evil:
♦ In order to provide benefits to some; the federal government violates the God-given property rights of others.
The federal government robs Peter to pay Paul.
♦ In order to protect us from the challenges of life (including made up problems such as “global warming” and “lack of medical insurance”), the federal government violates everyone’s God-given rights to Liberty.
And thus today, the federal government:
♦ Usurps powers not delegated to it in the Constitution.
Most of what it does is unconstitutional as outside the enumerated powers delegated in our Constitution.
♦ Has become an instrument of oppression, injustice, and immorality.
♦ Has taken away most of our God given rights, and is now conniving to take away our God given right to self-defense.
Now you know how the federal government was transformed from being the securer of our God given rights to a tyranny which oppresses some of the people for the benefit of others; and takes everyone’s Liberty away – except for those in the ruling class.
So!
What do We do?
What can We do?
The nullification deniers insist We must obey whatever Congress and the President dictate unless five (5) judges on the supreme Court say We don’t have to.
They say the supreme Court is the final authority on what is constitutional and what is not.
But think: Who created the federal government?
We did!
It is our “creature”.
Is the “creature” to dictate to the “creator”?
The nullification deniers say, “Yes!”
They say that:
♦ Every law made by Congress [the Legislative Branch of the federal government] is “supreme”; and
♦ Every executive order issued by the President [the Executive Branch of the federal government] is binding; and
♦ The States and The People must obey, unless and until five (5) judges on the supreme Court [the Judicial Branch of the federal government] say the law or executive order is unconstitutional.
In other words, only the federal government may question the federal government; and NO ONE may question the supreme Court!
Under their vision, the federal government WE created with the Constitution is the exclusive and final judge of the extent of the powers WE delegated to it; and the opinion of five (5) judges, not the Constitution, is the sole measure of its powers.
Jarrett Stepman regurgitates the statist lie that “the ultimate decision maker in terms of America’s political system is the Supreme Court.”
Randy Barnett , law professor, chants the statist refrain, “…What has the Supreme Court said and meant?
and … Are there now five justices to sustain the claim?”
.
Barnett selects two paragraphs from Madison’s Report on the Virginia Resolutions (1799-1800) (which address the alien & sedition acts), and claims they show Madison “expressly denies, or at minimum equivocates about whether, there is a literal power of nullification in states”.
Well, We saw above that States couldn’t directly disobey the alien & sedition acts because they purported to grant dictatorial powers to the President; and did not require The States or The People to do – or not do – something.
And the two paragraphs Barnett claims are so “telling” as to The States’ lack of “literal power” to nullify anything, and as to the ultimate authority of the Judicial Branch, appear under Madison’s discussion of the last two Resolutions (the 7th  & 8th) where Virginia had asked other States to join them in taking measures to protect The States, The People and The Constitution from the federal government.
In his discussion of the 7th Resolution, Madison merely responded to the objection that only federal judges may declare the meaning of the Constitution:  Of course Citizens & States may declare acts of the federal government unconstitutional!
When they do so, they are not acting as judges – they are acting as Citizens and as Sovereign States to take those measures which need to be taken to protect themselves from unconstitutional acts of the federal government.
Now!
Note Well:  Madison says, in the same Report Barnett cites, that it is “a plain principle, founded in common sense” that The States are the final authority on whether the federal government has violated our Constitution!
Under his discussion of the 3rd Resolution, Madison says:
“It appears to your committee to be a plain principle, founded in common sense, illustrated by common practice, and essential to the nature of compacts; that where resort can be had to no tribunal superior to the authority of the parties, the parties themselves must be the rightful judges in the last resort, whether the bargain made, has been pursued or violated.
The Constitution of the United States was formed by the sanction of the States, given by each in its sovereign capacity.
It adds to the stability and dignity, as well as to the authority of the Constitution, that it rests on this legitimate and solid foundation.
The States then being the parties to the constitutional compact, and in their sovereign capacity, it follows of necessity, that there can be no tribunal above their authority, to decide in the last resort, whether the compact made by them be violated; and consequently that as the parties to it, they must themselves decide in the last resort, such questions as may be of sufficient magnitude to require their interposition.”
[emphasis mine]
A bit further down, Madison explains that if, when the federal government usurps power, the States cannot act so as to stop the usurpation, and thereby preserve the Constitution as well as the safety of The States; there would be no relief from usurped power.
This would subvert the Rights of the People as well as betray the fundamental principle of our Founding:
“…If the deliberate exercise, of dangerous power, palpably withheld by the Constitution, could not justify the parties to it, in interposing even so far as to arrest the progress of the evil, and thereby to preserve the Constitution itself as well as to provide for the safety of the parties to it; there would be an end to all relief from usurped power, and a direct subversion of the rights specified or recognized under all the State constitutions, as well as a plain denial of the fundamental principle on which our independence itself was declared.”
[emphasis mine]
A bit further down, Madison answers the objection “that the judicial authority is to be regarded as the sole expositor of the Constitution, in the last resort”.
Madison explains that when the federal government acts outside the Constitution by usurping powers, and when the Constitution affords no remedy to that usurpation; then the Sovereign States who are the Parties to the Constitution must likewise step outside the Constitution and appeal to that original natural right of self-defense.
Madison also says that the Judicial Branch is as likely to usurp as are the other two Branches.
Thus, The Sovereign States, as The Parties to the Constitution, have as much right to judge the usurpations of the Judicial Branch as they do the Legislative and Executive Branches:
“…the judicial department, also, may exercise or sanction dangerous powers beyond the grant of the Constitution; and, consequently, that the ultimate right of the parties to the Constitution, to judge whether the compact has been dangerously violated, must extend to violations by one delegated authority as well as by another — by the judiciary as well as by the executive, or the legislature.”
Madison goes on to say that all three Branches of the federal government obtain their delegated powers from the Constitution; and they may not annul the authority of their Creator.
And if the Judicial Branch connives with other Branches in usurping powers, our Constitution will be destroyed.
So the Judicial Branch does not have final say as
“…to the rights of the parties to the constitutional compact, from which the judicial as well as the other department hold their delegated trusts.
On any other hypothesis, the delegation of judicial power, would annul the authority delegating it; 10 and the concurrence of this department with the others in usurped powers, might subvert forever, and beyond the possible reach of any rightful remedy, the very Constitution, which all were instituted to preserve.”
Shame on you nullification deniers who misrepresent what Madison said, or ignorantly insist that Madison said the Judicial Branch is the Final Authority!
False Assertion 4:
That James Madison opposed Nullification by States of Unconstitutional Acts of the Federal Government.
Matthew Spalding (Heritage Foundation) and David Barton (Wallbuilders) cite South Carolina’s Nullification Crisis of 1832 as “proof” that James Madison “vehemently opposed” nullification.
What Spalding and Barton say is not true.
Did they read what Madison wrote on S. Carolina’s doctrine of nullification?
Are they so lacking in critical thinking skills that they can’t make the distinction between the nullification doctrine Madison (and Jefferson & Hamilton) embraced, and the peculiar doctrine of nullification advanced by S. Carolina?
We saw in Madison’s Report on the Virginia Resolutions (1799-1800)  that in a proper case, “interposing even so far as to arrest the progress of the evil” is essential “to preserve the Constitution itself as well as to provide for the safety of the parties to it”.
And we saw above that the condition which must be present before nullification is proper, is that the act of the federal government must be unconstitutional.
Now, let’s look at The Tariff Act of 1828 and the S. Carolina Nullification Crisis:
The South was agricultural.
During the 1820’s, the Southern States bought manufactured goods from England.
England bought cotton produced by the Southern States.
However, “infant industries” in the Northeast were producing some of the same manufactured goods as England; but they were more expensive than the English imports.
So they couldn’t compete with the cheaper imports.
So!
In 1828, Congress imposed a high tariff on the English imports.
The Southern States called this the “tariff of abominations”, because the tariff made the English goods too expensive to buy; and since the Southern States stopped buying English goods, the English stopped buying Southern cotton.
The Southern States had to pay more for manufactured goods, they lost the major buyer of their cotton; and their economy was weakened.
Now!
Note Well: Our Constitution delegates specific authority to Congress to impose tariffs on imports, and the tariff must be the same in each State (Art.
I, Sec.
8, cl.
1).
Thus, the Tariff Act of 1828 was constitutional!
11
So!
Can you, dear Reader, see something which Matthew Spalding, Ph.D., and David Barton are unable to see?
South Carolina wanted to nullify a constitutional law!
Of course, Madison opposed S. Carolina’s peculiar doctrine of nullification!
Madison (and Jefferson & Hamilton) always said the act nullified must be unconstitutional!
In his Notes on Nullification (1834) , 12  Madison addressed S. Carolina’s peculiar doctrine.
He said that in the Report of a special committee of the House of Representatives of South Carolina in 1828, a doctrine of nullification was set forth which asserted that:
♦ A State has a “constitutional right” to nullify any federal law; and
♦ The nullification is presumed valid, and is to remain in force, unless ¾ of the States, in a Convention, say the nullification isn’t valid.
What Madison opposed was the particular doctrine of nullification set forth by S. Carolina; and what Madison actually said about the S. Carolina doctrine is this:
♦ The federal government has delegated authority to impose import tariffs;
♦ The Constitution requires that all import tariffs be uniform throughout the United States;
♦ States can’t nullify tariffs which are authorized by the Constitution;
♦ ¼ of the States don’t have the right to dictate to ¾ of the States on matters within the powers delegated to the federal government;
♦  Nullification is not a “constitutional right”;
And near the end of his Notes, Madison quoted with approval Thomas Jefferson’s statement:
“…but, where powers are assumed which have not been delegated, a nullification of the act is the rightful remedy: that every State has a natural right in cases not within the compact, (casus non foederis,) to nullify of their own authority all assumptions of power by others within their limits: that without this right, they would be under the dominion, absolute and unlimited, of whosoever might exercise this right of judgment for them…” [boldface mine]
Madison then says:
“Thus the right of nullification meant by Mr. Jefferson is the natural right, which all admit to be a remedy against insupportable oppression.”
[emphasis mine]
Do you see?
Madison is saying that:
♦ S. Carolina couldn’t nullify the Tariff Act of 1828 because the Act was constitutional.
♦ Nullification is a “natural right”- it is not a “constitutional” right.
Rights don’t come from the Constitution.
♦ All agree that when the federal government acts outside of the Constitution, nullification by the States is the proper remedy.
Application Today
When WE THE PEOPLE ratified our Constitution, and thereby created the federal government, WE did not delegate to our “creature” power to control our medical care, restrict guns and ammunition, dictate what is done in the public schools, dictate how we use our lands, and all the thousands of things they do WE never gave them authority in our Constitution to do.
Accordingly, each State has a natural right to nullify these unconstitutional dictates within its borders.
These dictates are outside the compact The Sovereign States made with each other –WE never gave our “creature” power over these objects.
As Jefferson and Madison said, without Nullification, The States and The People would be under the absolute and unlimited control of the federal government.
And that, dear Reader, is where these nullification deniers, with their false assertions and shameful misrepresentations, would put you.
To sum this up:
♦ Nullification is a natural right of self-defense.
♦ Rights don’t come from the Constitution.
Like all Rights, the right of self-defense comes from God (The Declaration of Independence, 2nd para).
♦ Nullification is a reserved power within the meaning of the 10th Amendment.
The Constitution doesn’t prohibit States from nullifying, and We reserved the power to do it.
♦ God requires us to disobey civil authorities when they violate God’s Law.
That’s why the 2nd para of the Declaration of Independence says we have the duty to overthrow tyrannical government.
See: The Biblical Foundation of our Constitution .
♦ Nullification is required by Oath of Office:  Article VI, cl.
3 requires all State officers and judges to “support” the federal Constitution.
Therefore, when the federal government violates the Constitution, the States must smack them down.
Conclusion
Our Founders and Framers were a different People than we of today.
They were manly men who knew statecraft & political philosophy and could think.
But our “experts” of today have been indoctrinated with statism and can’t think.
They lie, or they just ignorantly repeat what they hear without checking it out to see if what they are repeating is true.
So WE need to man up, throw off the indoctrination and the phony “experts”, learn our Founding Documents including The Federalist Papers, and stop repeating the lies we are told.
Trust no one.
And repudiate cowardice as the proper response to the evil which is overtaking our Land.
Man up, People!
PH
Post script added October 2, 2013:
Something is rotten in the Cato Institute:  Robert A. Levy, Chairman of the Cato Institute, recently wrote an article published in the New York Times,  “ The Limits of Nullification “, where Levy regurgitates the same fabrication Randy Barnett told to the effect that Madison said in his Report of 1800, that all the States can do is express their opinion that a federal law is unconstitutional.
The kindest thing one can say about Levy’s article is that it is “childishly  ignorant”.
Endnotes:
1 Thomas Jefferson, The Kentucky Resolutions of 1798 , 8th Resolution.
2 James Madison, Notes on Nullification (1834) .
The quote is near the end.
Use “find” function.
3 The deniers seem unaware that The States retained sovereignty in all matters not exclusively delegated to the federal government.
Alexander Hamilton says in Federalist No. 32 (2nd para):
“An entire consolidation of the States into one complete national sovereignty would imply an entire subordination of the parts; and whatever powers might remain in them, would be altogether dependent on the general will.
But as the plan of the convention [the Constitution] aims only at a partial union or consolidation, the State governments would clearly retain all the rights of sovereignty which they before had, and which were not … EXCLUSIVELY delegated to the United States…” [caps are Hamilton’s; boldface mine]
Federalist No. 62 (5th para):
“…the equal vote allowed to each State [each State gets two U.S. Senators] is …a constitutional recognition of the portion of sovereignty remaining in the individual States and an instrument for preserving that residuary sovereignty… [in order to guard] … against an improper consolidation of the States into one simple republic.”
(Madison or Hamilton) [boldface mine]
See also Federalist No. 39 (Madison) (6th para, et seq.)
In Madison’s Report on The Virginia Resolutions (1799-1800) ,  he several times refers, in his discussion of the 3rd Resolution, to the States acting “in their sovereign capacity” when, as “the parties to the constitutional compact” they decide  “in the last resort, whether the compact made by them be violated”:
“…The states, then, being the parties to the constitutional compact, and in their sovereign capacity, it follows of necessity that there can be no tribunal, above their authority, to decide, in the last resort, whether the compact made by them be violated; and consequently, that, as the parties to it, they must themselves decide, in the last resort, such questions as may be of sufficient magnitude to require their interposition….”
[boldface mine]
4 Contrary to the misconstructions long and unlawfully applied by the federal government, the federal Constitution is one of enumerated powers only.
E.g.:
“…the proposed government cannot be deemed a national one; since its jurisdiction extends to certain enumerated objects only, and leaves to the several States a residuary and inviolable sovereignity over all other objects…” ( Federalist No. 39 , 3rd para from end) (Madison) [boldface mine]
“…the general [federal] government is not to be charged with the whole power of making and administering laws.
Its jurisdiction is limited to certain enumerated objects...” ( Federalist No. 14 , 8th para) (Madison) [boldface mine]
“…It merits particular attention … that the laws of the Confederacy [Congress], as to the ENUMERATED and LEGITIMATE objects of its jurisdiction, will become the SUPREME LAW of the land…Thus the legislatures, courts, and magistrates, of the respective members [the States], will be incorporated into the operations of the national government AS FAR AS ITS JUST AND CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY EXTENDS…” [caps are Hamilton’s] ( Federalist No. 27 , last para)
5   Our Constitution authorizes the federal government to secure our God-given rights in the ways appropriate for the national government of a Federation.
The States secure them in other ways.
6 The Kentucky Resolutions of 1798 ,8th Resolution.
7 Madison’s Notes on Nullification (1834) .
The quote is near the end.
Use “find” function.
8 This explains the limited “exclusive jurisdiction” of the federal government , and the areas where the federal government and The States have “concurrent jurisdiction”.
9 Teddy Roosevelt ran on the Progressive Platform of 1912.
Both major parties have been dominated by progressives ever since.
10 Hamilton says, respecting the Legislative Branch ( Federalist No. 78 , 10th para):
“…every act of a delegated authority, contrary to the tenor of the commission under which it is exercised, is void.
No legislative act, therefore, contrary to the Constitution, can be valid.
To deny this, would be to affirm, that the deputy is greater than his principal; that the servant is above his master; that the representatives of the people are superior to the people themselves; that men acting by virtue of powers, may do not only what their powers do not authorize, but what they forbid.”
[emphasis mine]
11 The Tariff Act of 1828 was constitutional; but benefited the Northeast at the expense of the South.
It thus violated our Founding Principle that governments exist to secure the rights God gave us.
God never gave us the right to be free of competition in business!
Since the tariff was constitutional, but unjust, the remedy was to get Congress to fix it.
12 Madison’s Notes on Nullification (1834) are long & rambling.
Copy to Word, enlarge the type, & color-code to sort out the strands of arguments.
Keep in mind that what Madison is addressing is S. Carolina’s peculiar doctrine where they wanted to nullify a constitutional tariff!
PH
January 31, 2013; revised October 23, 2013
Share this:
Tweet
Share on Tumblr
Pocket
Email
More
Like this:
Like Loading...
January 31, 2013 Posted by Publius Huldah | 10th Amendment , alien and sedition acts , Allen C. Guelzo , David Barton , Heritage Foundation , Interposition , Jarrett Stepman , Jim Crow laws , Kentucky Resolutions of 1798 , Madison's Notes on Nullification (1834) , Madison's Report on the Virginia Resolutions (1799-1800) , Martin Luther King , Matthew Spalding , Nullification , nullification deniers , Progressives , Randy Barnett , Robert A. Levy Cato Institute , South Carolina nullification crisis , Sovereign States , States Retained Powers , Tariff of Abominations , Tarrif Act of 1828 , Tenth Amendment , Thomas Jefferson , Virginia Resolutions of 1798 | Alexander Hamilton , alien and sedition acts , Allen C. Guelzo , David Barton , declaration of independence , enumerated powers , infant industries , interposition , Jarrett Stepman , Jim Crow laws , Kentucky Resolutions , Madison's Notes on Nullification (1834) , Madison's Report on the Virginia Resolutions (1799-1800) , Martin Luther King , Natural Rights , Nullification , progressives , Randy Barnett , reserved powers , Robert A. Levy Cato Institute , secure these rights , South Carolina nullification crisis , sovereign States , Tariff Act of 1828 , Tariff of Abominations , Tenth Amendment , The Federalist Papers , Thomas Jefferson , Virginia Resolutions | 108 Comments
PUBLIUS HULDAH
Categories
10th Amendment
12th Amendment
14th Amendment
14th Amendment citizens
17th Amendment
1st Amendment
20th amendment
28th Amendment
2nd Amendment
501 (c) (3) tax exemption
Abortion
Administrative Law
Advice and Consent
alien and sedition acts
Allen C. Guelzo
Amendments to the Constitution
Amendments: Parental Rights Amendment
Anchor Babies
Anti-Rights
Arizona Illegal Alien Law
Arizona Invasion
Arizona Lawsuit
Arizona's Proposition 200
armed citizens
Article II, Sec.
2
Article II, Sec.
3
Article II, Sec.
4
Article III Courts
Article III, Sec.
1
Article III, Sec.
2
Article IV, Sec.
4
Article V
Article V Convention
Article VI
Article VI, clause 2
Article VI, clause 3
Balance of Powers Act
Balanced Budget Amendment
Bible and civil government
Bills of attainder
Bureau of Alcohol Firearms and Tobacco (ATF)
Census
Checks and Balances
Chip DeMoss
Climate Change Treaty
Commerce clause
Compact for America
Constitution is not a suicide pact
constitutional convention
Convention of States project
Council on Foreign Relations
coverture
Creature of the Compact
Criminal Code (US)
cultural relativism
Danbury Baptists
David Barton
Declaration of Independence
Definitions and Basic Concepts
Delegates to a convention can't be controlled
Department of Health and Human Services
Department of Labor
Dick Act of 1903
Donald Trump
due process clause
Edwin Vieira
Einer Elhauge
Elastic clause
Election of President
Election of U.S. Senators
Elections Clause
Electoral College
Electors
Engel v. Vitale
enumerated powers
Enumerated Powers of Congress
Enumerated Powers of Federal Courts
Enumerated powers of the president
equal protection clause
establishment clause
ex post facto laws
Exceptions clause
Exclusive and Concurrent Jurisdiction
Executive Orders
Existentialism
Fabian socialism
Federal Convention of 1787
federal enclaves
Federal Form of government
Federalism
Federalist Paper No. 46
free exercise clause
General Welfare Clause
God-given Rights
Guardians of the Constitution
gun control
Health Care
Health Insurance – Auto Insurance analogy
Heidi Cruz
Heritage Foundation
High crimes and misdemeanors
homosexual marriage
Hugo Black and the KKK
Impeachment
Incorporation doctrine
Interposition
Interstate Commerce Clause
Isaiah 33:22
Isaiah 3:12
Islamization (Islamification)
James Madison
Jarrett Stepman
Jim Crow laws
Jim DeMint
Jordan Sillars
Judicial abstension
Judicial Abuse
Kentucky Resolutions of 1798
Kevin Gutzman
Kim Davis
Liberty Amendments
Madison's Notes on Nullification (1834)
Madison's Report on the Virginia Resolutions (1799-1800)
man made anti-rights
Marbury v. Madison
Marco Rubio
Mark Levin
marque and reprisal
Marriage
Marriage Amendment
Martin Luther King
Matthew Spalding
Medicare
Merchant Seamen healthcare
Michael Farris
Michael Seidman
Militia
multiculturalism
National Popular Vote
natural born citizen
Naturalized citizens
Necessary and Proper clause
Nick Dranias
North American Union
not on the list
Nullification
nullification deniers
Oath of Office
obamacare
on the list
Original and appellate jurisdiction
Original Intent or Evolving Constitution?
Parental Rights Amendment
parentalrights.org
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
Personal Responsibility
Phony right wing
Phyllis Schlafly
Pledge of Allegiance
political questions
Pragmatism
prayer in public schools
President's enumerated powers
President's powers
Presidential Electors
prevailing dogma
Progressive Education
Progressives
Randy Barnett
re-writing the Constitution
Recess Appointments
Reserved Powers
Resistance to tyranny
Retained Powers
Rights
Rob Natelson
Robert A. Levy Cato Institute
Rule of Law
Rule of Man
Rulemaking by Executive Agencies
safety nets for the poor
same sex marriage
Saul Alinsky
secure these rights
Self Government
Sell out Republicans
Sen. Mike Lee
Separation of Church and State?
separation of powers
sharia
shining city on a hill
social safety nets
social security
South Carolina nullification crisis
Sovereign States
Spineless Republicans
States Retained Powers
States Rights
Supremacy clause
Supreme Court
Supreme Law of the Land
sweeping clause
Tariff of Abominations
Tarrif Act of 1828
Ted Cruz
Tennessee Constitution
Tenth Amendment
Term Limits Amendment
The Liberty Amendments
The taxing clause
The Tennessee Resolutions
Thomas Jefferson
Treaty Making Powers of the United States
Troxel v. Granville
UN Convention on the Rights of the Child
UN Declaration of Rights
Uncategorized
under the law
Usurpations of power
Vattel
Virginia Resolutions of 1798
Voter eligibility
Voter Qualifications
What States must do when the feds usurp power
Archives
May 2016  (1)
April 2016  (2)
February 2016  (5)
January 2016  (3)
December 2015  (1)
November 2015  (2)
October 2015  (2)
September 2015  (4)
August 2015  (4)
July 2015  (2)
June 2015  (2)
May 2015  (4)
April 2015  (3)
March 2015  (2)
February 2015  (3)
January 2015  (1)
December 2014  (1)
October 2014  (1)
September 2014  (1)
April 2014  (1)
February 2014  (3)
January 2014  (1)
December 2013  (1)
September 2013  (2)
August 2013  (1)
July 2013  (2)
April 2013  (1)
March 2013  (2)
January 2013  (2)
December 2012  (1)
November 2012  (1)
August 2012  (1)
July 2012  (2)
June 2012  (1)
May 2012  (1)
April 2012  (2)
March 2012  (1)
February 2012  (1)
January 2012  (2)
December 2011  (1)
August 2011  (1)
June 2011  (1)
April 2011  (1)
March 2011  (2)
February 2011  (1)
January 2011  (2)
December 2010  (1)
October 2010  (1)
September 2010  (1)
August 2010  (1)
July 2010  (2)
June 2010  (1)
May 2010  (1)
April 2010  (2)
March 2010  (2)
January 2010  (1)
December 2009  (1)
October 2009  (4)
September 2009  (2)
June 2009  (4)
Pages
About
Article V
Ask Questions!
Comment Policy
Contact
Daily Commentary
Recent Posts
Get your State Militia revitalized before it’s too late!
Dayton, Ohio event on May 2
Event in Jefferson City, Missouri to speak on the con.
Trashing the 12th Amendment with the National Popular Vote
Natural Born Citizen and Naturalized Citizen Explained
Who Makes the Ruling that Someone is not Qualified for the Office of President of the United States?
How a Balanced Budget Amendment Would Give the Federal Government Lawful Power Over Whatever They Want
PH’s natural born citizen & Art.
V convention event in Fairfield Glade, TN
Convention Supporters’ Myths about State Control of Delegates
Natural born citizen status is inherited – it’s not bestowed by the Constitution or Acts of Congress
Search for:
Meta
Register
Log in
Entries RSS
Comments RSS
WordPress.com
Follow Blog via Email
Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
Thank you for subscribing!
You should get a confirmation email.
If you don't, check your spam file!
Site info
Publius-Huldah's Blog
The Andreas04 Theme .
Blog at WordPress.com.
Follow
Follow “Publius-Huldah's Blog”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 1,892 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.
%d bloggers like this: