Clinton Engineer Works (CEW) 

Location: Oak Ridge, Tennessee

Also Known As: Oak Ridge Area, Oak Ridge Reservation
Special Exposure Cohort Petition Information

The Special Exposure Cohort (SEC) is a unique category of employees established by the Act (42 CFR Part 83). Claims compensated under the SEC do not have to go through the dose reconstruction process. To qualify for compensation under the SEC, a covered employee must meet specific requirements (e.g., must have at least one of 22 "specified cancers," and have worked for a specified time period at one of the SEC sites). Classes of employees and work sites can be considered for addition to the SEC through a NIOSH petition process. More information about the Special Exposure Cohort can be found on our Frequently Asked Questions page.
Open/Active SEC Petitions

To date, there are no open/active SEC petitions from Clinton Engineer Works.
Class(es) Added to the SEC

    All employees of the Tennessee Eastman Corporation (1943–1947) and the Carbide and Carbon Chemicals Corporation (1947–1949) who were employed at the Clinton Engineer Works in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, from January 1, 1943 through December 31, 1949 for a number of work days aggregating at least 250 work days, occurring either solely under this employment or in combination with work days within the parameters established for one or more classes of employees included in the Special Exposure Cohort.

    Note: This class was established from Petition 178

Petitions Qualified for Evaluation

Below is a list of the petitions that qualified for evaluation. Select a petition on the list to view the table for that particular petition.
Petitions
+ Petition 178Jan 1, 1943 to May 18, 1947
Public Comments on Clinton Engineer Works Documents
How to Submit Comments

Comments on Clinton Engineer Works documents can be submitted to the NIOSH Docket Officer electronically by email at nioshdocket@cdc.gov or printed comments can be mailed to:

NIOSH Docket Office
Robert A. Taft Laboratories, MS-C34
1090 Tusculum Avenue
Cincinnati, OH 45226
Please include the Site Profile/Docket Number (222) on all comments.
Comments Received

At this time, no comments have been submitted.