Apr
MAY
Jun
25
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
25 May 16 - 25 May 16
Close Help
 
My Account | Register  |  Help   
  
My Dashboard
Get Published
Home
Books
Academic eBook Collections
eBook Library Collections
Graphic Novel Collections
Journal and Magazine Collection
Audio eBook Collection
Library Exhibits
Search
Support
How-To Tutorials
Improve Article
Suggestions
Machine Translation Editions
Noahs Archive Project
About Us
Terms and Conditions
Get Published
Submission Guidelines
Self-Publish Check List
Why Choose Self-publishing?
 
Most Popular     New Releases     Top Picks     Kid 25's
   
 
1
2
3
4
5
Email this Article
Email Address:
Article Id: WHEBN0000060005
Reproduction Date:
Title:
 
Author:
World Heritage Encyclopedia
Language:
English
Subject:
Far Eastern Party , Nimrod Expedition , List of Antarctic expeditions , Roald Amundsen , SY Aurora
Collection:
Publisher:
World Heritage Encyclopedia
Publication
Date:
 
Sir Douglas Mawson
Portrait of Douglas Mawson in 1911
Born
(1882-05-05)5 May 1882
Shipley , West Yorkshire , England , United Kingdom
Died
14 October 1958(1958-10-14) (aged 76)
Brighton , South Australia
Nationality
Australian
Education
Fort Street Model School and University of Sydney , Sydney , New South Wales
Occupation
Geologist , chemistry demonstrator, Antarctic explorer , academic
Known for
First ascent of Mount Erebus
First team to reach the South Magnetic Pole
Sole survivor of Far Eastern Party
Australasian Antarctic Expedition
Mawson's Huts
Mawson Plateau
Spouse(s)
Francisca Paquita Delprat
(married 1914)
Children
Patricia
(born 1915)
Jessica
(born 1917)
Awards
Fellow of the Royal Society [1]
Bigsby Medal
(1919)
Clarke Medal
(1936)
Sir Douglas Mawson OBE FRS [1] FAA (5 May 1882 – 14 October 1958) was an Australian geologist , Antarctic explorer and academic . Along with Roald Amundsen , Robert Falcon Scott , and Ernest Shackleton , Mawson was a key expedition leader during the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration .
Contents
1 Early life
2 Early work
3 Nimrod Expedition
4 Australasian Antarctic Expedition
5 Home of the Blizzard
6 Later life
7 Legacy
8 Burial
9 References
10 Sources
11 Further reading
Early life
Mawson was born on 5 May 1882 to Robert Ellis Mawson and Margaret Ann Mawson (née Moore). He was born in Shipley, West Yorkshire , but was only two years old when his family emigrated to Australia and settled at Rooty Hill , now in the western suburbs of Sydney . He attended Fort Street Model School and the University of Sydney , where he graduated in 1902 with a Bachelor of Engineering degree. [2]
Early work
Caricature by Sir David Low
He was appointed geologist to an expedition to the New Hebrides (now Vanuatu ) in 1903; his report The Geology of the New Hebrides, was one of the first major geological works of Melanesia . Also that year he published a geological paper on Mittagong, New South Wales . His major influences in his geological career were Professor Edgeworth David and Professor Archibald Liversidge . He then became a lecturer in petrology and mineralogy at the University of Adelaide in 1905. [2] He identified and first described the mineral Davidite .
Nimrod Expedition
Mawson joined Ernest Shackleton 's Nimrod Expedition (1907–09), originally intending to stay for the duration of the ship's presence in the first summer. Instead both he and his mentor, Edgeworth David stayed an extra year. In doing so they became, in the company of Alistair Mackay , the first to climb the summit of Mount Erebus and to trek to the South Magnetic Pole , which at that time was over land.
Mackay, David and Mawson raise the flag at the Magnetic South Pole on 16 January 1909
Australasian Antarctic Expedition
Mawson turned down an invitation to join Robert Falcon Scott's Adelie Land , the sector of the Antarctic continent immediately south of Australia, which at the time was almost entirely unexplored. The objectives were to carry out geographical exploration and scientific studies, including a visit to the South Magnetic Pole . Mawson raised the necessary funds in a year, from British and Australian governments, and from commercial backers interested in mining and whaling . [3]
The expedition, using the ship SY Aurora commanded by Captain John King Davis , departed from Hobart on 2 December 1911, landed at  Cape Denison (named after Hugh Denison , a major backer of the expedition) on Commonwealth Bay on 8 January 1912, and established the Main Base. A second camp was located to the west on the ice shelf in Queen Mary Land . Cape Denison proved to be unrelentingly windy; the average wind speed for the entire year was about 50 mph (80 km/h), with some winds approaching 200 mph. They built a hut on the rocky cape and wintered through nearly constant blizzards . Mawson wanted to do aerial exploration and brought the first aeroplane to Antarctica. The aircraft, a Vickers R.E.P. Type Monoplane , [4] was to be flown by Francis Howard Bickerton . When it was damaged in Australia shortly before the expedition departed, plans were changed so it was to be used only as a tractor on skis. However, the engine did not operate well in the cold, and it was removed and returned to Vickers in England . The aircraft fuselage itself was abandoned. On 1 January 2009, fragments of it were rediscovered by the Mawson's Huts Foundation, which is restoring the original huts. [5]
Mawson's exploration program was carried out by five parties from the Main Base and two from the Western Base. Mawson himself was part of a three-man sledging team, the coastline and collecting geological samples, the party was crossing the Ninnis Glacier 480 km east of the main base. Mertz was skiing and Mawson was on his sled with his weight dispersed, but Ninnis was jogging beside the second sled. Ninnis fell through a snow-covered crevasse , and his body weight is likely to have breached the lid. The six best dogs, most of the party's rations, their tent, and other essential supplies disappeared into the massive crevasse. Mertz and Mawson spotted one dead and one injured dog on a ledge 165 ft below them, but Ninnis was never seen again. [6]
After a brief service, Mawson and Mertz turned back immediately. They had one week's provisions for two men and no dog food but plenty of fuel and a primus . They sledged for 27 hours continuously to obtain a spare tent cover they had left behind, for which they improvised a frame from skis and a theodolite . Their lack of provisions forced them to use their remaining sled dogs to feed the other dogs and themselves:
"Their meat was stringy, tough and without a vestige of fat. For a change we sometimes chopped it up finely, mixed it with a little pemmican , and brought all to the boil in a large pot of water. We were exceedingly hungry, but there was nothing to satisfy our appetites. Only a few ounces were used of the stock of ordinary food, to which was added a portion of dog's meat, never large, for each animal yielded so very little, and the major part was fed to the surviving dogs. They crunched the bones and ate the skin, until nothing remained." [7]
There was a quick deterioration in the men's physical condition during this journey. Both men suffered dizziness ; nausea ; abdominal pain ; irrationality ; mucosal fissuring; skin, hair, and nail loss; and the yellowing of eyes and skin. Later Mawson noticed a dramatic change in his travelling companion. Mertz seemed to lose the will to move and wished only to remain in his sleeping bag. He began to deteriorate rapidly with diarrhoea and madness. On one occasion Mertz refused to believe he was suffering from frostbite and bit off the tip of his own little finger. This was soon followed by violent raging—Mawson had to sit on his companion's chest and hold down his arms to prevent him from damaging their tent. Mertz suffered further seizures before falling into a coma and dying on 8 January 1913. [8]
It was unknown at the time that Husky liver contains extremely high levels of vitamin A . It was also not known that such levels of vitamin A could cause liver damage to humans. [9] With six dogs between them (with a liver on average weighing 1 kg), it is thought that the pair ingested enough liver to bring on a condition known as Hypervitaminosis A . However, Mertz may have suffered more because he found the tough muscle tissue difficult to eat and therefore ate more of the liver than Mawson. [10] It is of interest to note that in Inuit tradition the dog's liver is never eaten. While both men suffered, Mertz suffered chronically.
Mawson continued the final 100 miles alone. During his return trip to the Main Base he fell through the lid of a crevasse, and was saved only by his sledge wedging itself into the ice above him. He was forced to climb out using the harness attaching him to the sled.
When Mawson finally made it back to Cape Denison , the ship Aurora had left only a few hours before. It was recalled by wireless communication , only to have bad weather thwart the rescue effort. Mawson and six men who had remained behind to look for him, wintered a second year until December 1913. In Mawson's book Home of the Blizzard, he describes his experiences. His party, and those at the Western Base, had explored large areas of the Antarctic coast, describing its geology , biology and meteorology , and more closely defining the location of the south magnetic pole. In 1916, the American Geographical Society awarded Mawson the David Livingstone Centenary Medal . [11]
The expedition was the subject of David Roberts's book Alone on the Ice: The Greatest Survival Story in the History of Exploration (W. W. Norton & Company, 2013)
Home of the Blizzard
In his book The Home of the Blizzard, Mawson talked of "Herculean gusts" on 24 May 1912 which he learned afterwards "approached two hundred miles per hour". [12] Mawson reported that the average wind speed for March was 49 miles per hour; for April, 51.5 miles per hour; and for May, 67.719 miles per hour. [13] These katabatic winds can reach around 300 km/h (190 mph) and led Mawson to dub Cape Denison "the windiest place on Earth". [14] [15]
Later life
Bust of Mawson on North Terrace , Adelaide , South Australia in front of the University of Adelaide
The Mawson Laboratories at the University of Adelaide, formerly the Department of Geology & Geophysics, where Mawson taught until his retirement in 1952.
Mawson married Francisca Adriana (Paquita) Delprat (daughter of G. D. Delprat ) on 31 March 1914 at Holy Trinity Church of England, Balaclava , Victoria . They had two daughters, Patricia and Jessica. Also in 1914, he was knighted, and was preoccupied with news of the Scott disaster until the outbreak of World War I . Mawson served in the war as a Major in the British Ministry of Munitions . Returning to Adelaide , South Australia he pursued his academic studies, taking further expeditions abroad, including a joint British, Australian and New Zealand expedition to the Antarctic in 1929–31.
The work done by the British Australian and New Zealand Antarctic Research Expedition led to the formation of the Australian Antarctic Territory in 1936. He also spent much of his time researching the geology of the northern Flinders Ranges in South Australia.
Upon his retirement from teaching in 1952 he was made Emeritus Professor of the University of Adelaide. He died at his Brighton home on 14 October 1958 from a cerebral haemorrhage . [16] He was 76 years old. At the time of his death he had still not completed editorial work on all the papers resulting from his expedition, and this was completed by his eldest daughter, Patricia, only in 1975.
Legacy
His image appeared from 1984 to 1996 on the Australian paper one hundred dollar note and in 2012 on a $1 coin issued within the Inspirational Australians series. [17] Mawson Peak ( Heard Island ), Mount Mawson ( Tasmania ), Mawson Station ( Antarctica ), Dorsa Mawson ( Mare Fecunditatis ), the geology building on the main University of Adelaide campus, suburbs in Canberra and Adelaide , a University of South Australian campus and the main street of Meadows , South Australia are named after him. Oxley College in Burradoo , New South Wales , a sports house is called Mawson, as is at Clarence High School in Hobart , Tasmania , Forest Lodge Public School, Sydney and Fort Street High School , where he was educated. The Mawson Collection of Antarctic exploration artefacts is on permanent display at the South Australian Museum , including a screening of a recreated version of his journey that was shown on ABC Television on 12 May 2008.
In 2011, Ranulph Fiennes included Mawson in his book My Heroes: Extraordinary Courage, Exceptional People.
In 2013 an "Australian Mawson Centenary Expedition" was led by Australian Polar scientists, Chris Turney and Chris Fogwill, of the University of New South Wales , together with Antarctic veteran geologist and mountaineer, Greg Mortimer and a group of scientists and adventurers. The expedition was centred on Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic oceanography, climate and biology. The ship, the " MV Akademik Shokalskiy ", became trapped in the Antarctic sea ice. [18] In December 2013, some of the expedition members revisited Mawson's huts at Cape Denison on Commonwealth Bay. [19]
However, after the release of Mawson's journals and other expedition records, some historians have questioned Mawson's navigation, risk-taking and leadership. [3]
In December 2013, the first opera to be based on Mawson's 1911–14 expedition to Antarctica, "The Call of Aurora" (by Tasmanian composer Joe Bugden) [20] was performed at The Peacock Theatre in Hobart. "The Call of Aurora" investigates the relationship between Douglas Mawson and his wireless operator, Sidney Jeffryes , who developed symptoms of paranoia and had to be relieved of his duties.
Burial
Sir Douglas Mawson was buried at the historic (estab 1854) cemetery of Saint Jude's Anglican Church, 444 Brighton Road, Brighton, South Australia , in 1958.
Sir Douglas Mawson's grave at St Jude's, at Brighton, South Australia 
Main plaque on the granite boulder marking the grave of
Sir Douglas Mawson 
Plaque acknowledging gift of the boulder from Arkaroola marking Mawson's grave, from the Sprigg family 
References
^ a b Alderman, A. R.; Tilley, C. E. (1960). "Douglas Mawson 1882-1958".  
^ a b "Douglas Mawson".  
^ a b Mark Pharoah, curator of the Mawson collection at the South Australia Museum in Adelaide. Cited by Andrew Luck-Baker, Douglas Mawson: An Australian hero's story of survival, BBC News, 27 February 2014.
^ CDWS-1 Air tractor tail
^ Relic of Antarctica's first plane discovered on ice edge
^ http://www.south-pole.com/p0000099.htm www.south-pole.com
^ Sir Douglas Mawson (2009) [Autumn 1914]. Geoffrey Cowling; David Widger, eds. The Home of the Blizzard: Being the Story of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition, 1911-1914. London, UK: Project Gutenberg. 
^ Bickel, Lennard (2000). Mawson's Will: The Greatest Polar Survival Story Ever Written, Hanover, New Hampshire: Steerforth Press. ISBN 1-58642-000-3
^ Vitamin A toxicity
^ "Man's Best Friend?". Student BMJ 2002;10:131–170 May. Retrieved 11 November 2009. 
^ "The Cullum Geographical Medal". American Geographical Society. Retrieved 17 June 2010.
^ Mawson, D: "The Home of the Blizzard, Vol I", page 133, J. B. Lippincott, no date
^ Mawson, D: "The Home of the Blizzard, Vol I", page 134, J. B. Lippincott, no date
^ Trewby, M. (Ed., 2002): Antarctica. An encyclopedia from Abbott Ice Shelf to Zooplankton Firefly Books Ltd. ISBN 1-55297-590-8
^ Australian Antarctic Division > Home of the Blizzard Accessed 10 October 2013.
^ Mawson, Sir Douglas (1882–1958) Biographical Entry – Australian Dictionary of Biography Online
^ Sir Douglas Mawson Featured on Australian $1 Coin
^ "Australian Spirit of Mawson ship trapped in Antarctic sea ice". explorersweb.com. 29 December 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2013. 
^ "Expedition to Mawson's Huts: a journey into Antarctica – video".  
^ "The Call of Aurora". December 2013. Retrieved 28 February 2014. 
Sources
Bickel, Lennard [1977] (2001). This Accursed Land, foreword by Sir Edmund Hillary, Edinburgh: Birlinn Ltd. ISBN 1-84158-141-0.
Caesar, Adrian :The White: Last Days in the Antarctic Journeys of Scott and Mawson 1911–1913 Pan MacMillan, Sydney, 1999, ISBN 0-330-36157-0
Carrington-Smith, Denise (2005). "Mawson and Mertz: a re-evaluation of their ill-fated mapping journey during the 1911–1914 Australasian Antarctic Expedition". The Medical Journal of Australia 183 (11–12). pp. 638–41.  
Hall, Lincoln (2000) Douglas Mawson, The Life of an Explorer New Holland, Sydney ISBN 1-86436-670-2
Jacka, F. J. "Mawson, Sir Douglas (1882–1958)", Australian Dictionary of Biography , Volume 10, MUP , 1986, pp 454–457.
Mawson, Sir Douglas (no date given) The Home of the Blizzard, being the story of the Australasian Antarctic expedition, 1911–1914 Vol. I, London: Ballantyne Press.
Roberts, Peder (2004). "Fighting the 'microbe of sporting mania': Australian science and Antarctic exploration in the early 20th century". Endeavour 28 (3) (September 2004). pp. 109–113.  
Turney, Chris (2013), 1912: The Year The World Discovered Antarctica, Text Publishing, Melbourne.
Further reading
Library resources about
Douglas Mawson
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
By Douglas Mawson
Online books
Resources in your library
Resources in other libraries
Jacka, Fred; Jacka, Eleanor, eds. (1988). Mawson's Antarctic Diaries. London, Sidney and Wellington: Unwin Hyman.  
Roberts, David . Alone on the Ice: The Greatest Survival Story in the History of Exploration. (21 January 2013) W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 9780393240160
Mawson's Antarctic Newspaper Mawson's Antarctic Newspaper, article in www.TheGlobalDispatches.com, accessed 9 January 2013
Mawson, Douglas (Sir) (1882–1958) National Library of Australia, Trove, People and Organisation record for Sir Douglas Mawson
Douglas Mawson in Antarctica
Hurley, Frank. Collection of Photographic Prints. Images of Mawson Expedition 1911–14 held at Pictures Branch, National Library of Australia, Canberra
National Archives of Australia, Records of BANZARE, Australian Antarctic Division, Department of External Affairs etc., personal papers of Baron Casey papers (M1129, A10299), Charles Francis Laseron, and P G Law (MP1002/1)
"Sir Douglas Mawson, the unsung hero of Antarctica, gets his due at last", Paul Harris, The Observer , 26 January 2013
Awards
Preceded by
G. W. Card
Clarke Medal
1936
Succeeded by
John Thomas Jutson
Australasian Antarctic Expedition
Personnel
Main Base party
Bob Bage
Frank Bickerton
John Close
Percy Correll
Walter Hannam
Alfred Hodgeman
John Hunter
Frank Hurley
Sidney Jeffryes
Charles Laseron
Cecil Madigan
Douglas Mawson
Archibald McLean
Xavier Mertz
Herbert Murphy
B. E. S. Ninnis
Frank Stillwell
Eric Webb
Leslie Whetter
Western Base party
Charles Dovers
Charles Harrisson
Charles Hoadley
Sydney Jones
Alexander Kennedy
Morton Moyes
Andrew Watson
Frank Wild
Macquarie Island party
George Ainsworth
Leslie Blake
Harold Hamilton
Charles Sandell
Arthur Sawyer
SY Aurora officers
John H. Blair
John King Davis
Frank D. Fletcher
F. J. Gillies
Percival Gray
Clarence Petersen de la Motte
Norman Toutcher
Other
Hugh Evelyn Watkins
Parties and vessels
Far Eastern Party
SY Aurora
Western Base Party
Places
Adélie Land
Cape Denison
Commonwealth Bay
King George V Land
Macquarie Island
Mertz Glacier
Ninnis Glacier
Queen Mary Land
Shackleton Ice Shelf
Wireless Hill
Other
Adélie Land meteorite
Air-tractor sledge
Mawson's Huts
Category
Antarctica
General
Antarctic Treaty System
Climate
Colonization
Demographics
Economy
Expeditions
Field camps
Flags
Geography
Geology
History
Mammals
Military activity
Protected areas
Religion
Research stations
Telecommunications
Territorial claims
Time
Tourism
Transport
Volcanoes
Wildlife
Geographic regions
Antarctic Peninsula
East Antarctica
West Antarctica
Ecozone
Extreme points
Islands
Waterways
Lake Vostok
List of rivers
McMurdo Sound
Ross Sea
Southern Ocean
Weddell Sea
Famous explorers
Roald Amundsen
Richard E. Byrd
Douglas Mawson
James Clark Ross
Robert Falcon Scott
Ernest Shackleton
more...
Category
Portal
Polar exploration
 
Arctic
Ocean
History
Expeditions
Farthest North
North Pole
Barentsz
Hudson
Marmaduke
Carolus
Parry
North Magnetic Pole
J. Ross
J. C. Ross
Kane
Hayes
Polaris
Polaris
C. F. Hall
British Arctic Expedition
HMS Alert
Nares
HMS Discovery
Stephenson
Markham
Lady Franklin Bay Expedition
Greely
Lockwood
Brainard
1st Fram expedition
Fram
Nansen
Johansen
Sverdrup
Jason
Amedeo
F. Cook
Peary
Sedov
Byrd
Airship Norge
Amundsen
Nobile
Wisting
Riiser-Larsen
Ellsworth
Airship Italia
Nautilus
Wilkins
ANT-25
Chkalov
Baydukov
Belyakov
"North Pole" manned drifting ice stations
NP-1
Papanin
Shirshov
E. Fyodorov
Krenkel
NP-36
NP-37
Sedov
Badygin
Wiese
USS Nautilus
USS Skate
Plaisted
Herbert
NS Arktika
Barneo
Arktika 2007
Mir submersibles
Sagalevich
Chilingarov
Iceland
Greenland
Pytheas
Brendan
Papar
Vikings
Naddodd
Svavarsson
Arnarson
Norse colonization of the Americas
Ulfsson
Galti
Erik the Red
Christian IV's expeditions
J. Hall
Cunningham
Lindenov
C. Richardson
Danish colonization
Egede
Scoresby
Jason
Nansen
Sverdrup
Peary
Rasmussen
Northwest Passage
Northern Canada
Cabot
G. Corte-Real
M. Corte-Real
Frobisher
Gilbert
Davis
Hudson
Discovery
Bylot
Baffin
Munk
I. Fyodorov
Gvozdev
HMS Resolution
J. Cook
HMS Discovery
Clerke
Mackenzie
Kotzebue
J. Ross
HMS Griper
Parry
HMS Hecla
Lyon
HMS Fury
Hoppner
Crozier
J. C. Ross
Coppermine Expedition
Franklin
Back
Dease
Simpson
HMS Blossom
Beechey
Franklin's lost expedition
HMS Erebus
HMS Terror
Collinson
Rae–Richardson Expedition
Rae
J. Richardson
Austin
McClure Expedition
HMS Investigator
McClure
HMS Resolute
Kellett
Belcher
Kennedy
Bellot
Isabel
Inglefield
2nd Grinnell Expedition
USS Advance
Kane
Fox
McClintock
HMS Pandora
Young
Fram
Sverdrup
Gjøa
Amundsen
Rasmussen
Karluk
Stefansson
Bartlett
St. Roch
H. Larsen
Cowper
North East Passage
Russian Arctic
Pomors
Koch boats
Willoughby
Chancellor
Barentsz
Mangazeya
Hudson
Poole
Siberian Cossacks
Perfilyev
Stadukhin
Dezhnev
Popov
Ivanov
Vagin
Permyakov
Great Northern Expedition
Bering
Chirikov
Malygin
Ovtsyn
Minin
V. Pronchishchev
M. Pronchishcheva
Chelyuskin
Kh. Laptev
D. Laptev
Chichagov
Lyakhov
Billings
Sannikov
Gedenschtrom
Wrangel
Matyushkin
Anjou
Litke
Lavrov
Pakhtusov
Tsivolko
Middendorff
Austro-Hungarian Expedition
Weyprecht
Payer
Vega Expedition
A. E. Nordenskiöld
Palander
USS Jeannette
DeLong
Yermak
Makarov
Zarya
Toll
Kolomeitsev
Matisen
Kolchak
Sedov
Rusanov
Kuchin
Brusilov Expedition
Sv. Anna
Brusilov
Albanov
Konrad
Wiese
Nagórski
Taymyr / Vaygach
Vilkitsky
Maud
Amundsen
AARI
Samoylovich
Begichev
Urvantsev
Sadko
Ushakov
Glavsevmorput
Schmidt
Aviaarktika
Shevelev
Sibiryakov
Voronin
Chelyuskin
Krasin
Gakkel
Nuclear-powered icebreakers
NS Lenin
Arktika class
 
Antarctic
Continent
History
Expeditions
Southern Ocean
Roché
Bouvet
Kerguelen
HMS Resolution
J. Cook
HMS Adventure
Furneaux
Smith
San Telmo
Vostok
Bellingshausen
Mirny
Lazarev
Bransfield
Palmer
Davis
Weddell
Morrell
Astrolabe
Dumont d'Urville
United States Exploring Expedition
USS Vincennes
Wilkes
USS Porpoise
Ringgold
HMS Erebus
J. C. Ross
HMS Terror
Crozier
Cooper
Challenger expedition
HMS Challenger
Nares
Murray
Jason
C. A. Larsen
" Heroic Age "
Belgian Antarctic Expedition
Belgica
de Gerlache
Lecointe
Amundsen
Cook
Arctowski
Racoviță
Dobrowolski
Southern Cross
Southern Cross
Borchgrevink
Discovery
Discovery
Discovery Hut
Gauss
Gauss
Drygalski
Swedish Antarctic Expedition
Antarctic
O. Nordenskjöld
C. A. Larsen
Scottish Antarctic Expedition
Bruce
Orcadas Base
Nimrod Expedition
Nimrod
French Antarctic Expeditions
Pourquoi-Pas
Charcot
Japanese Antarctic Expedition
Shirase
Amundsen's South Pole expedition
Fram
Amundsen
Framheim
Polheim
Terra Nova
Terra Nova
Scott
Wilson
E. R. Evans
Crean
Lashly
Filchner
Australasian Antarctic Expedition
SY Aurora
Mawson
Far Eastern Party
Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition
Endurance
Ernest Shackleton
Wild
James Caird
Ross Sea party
Mackintosh
Shackleton–Rowett Expedition
Quest
IPY · IGY
Modern research
Christensen
Byrd
BANZARE
BGLE
Rymill
New Swabia
Ritscher
Operation Tabarin
Marr
Operation Highjump
Captain Arturo Prat Base
British Antarctic Survey
Operation Windmill
Ketchum
Ronne Expedition
Finn Ronne
Edith "Jackie" Ronne
Schlossbach
Operation Deep Freeze
McMurdo Station
Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition
Hillary
V. Fuchs
Soviet Antarctic Expeditions
1st
Somov
Klenova
Mirny
2nd
Tryoshnikov
3rd
Tolstikov
Antarctic Treaty System
Transglobe Expedition
Fiennes
Burton
Lake Vostok
Kapitsa
Farthest South
South Pole
HMS Resolution
J. Cook
HMS Adventure
Furneaux
Weddell
HMS Erebus
J. C. Ross
HMS Terror
Crozier
Southern Cross
Borchgrevink
Discovery
Barne
Nimrod
Shackleton
Wild
Marshall
Adams
South Magnetic Pole
Mawson
David
Mackay
Amundsen's South Pole expedition
Fram
Amundsen
Bjaaland
Helmer
Hassel
Wisting
Polheim
Terra Nova
Scott
E. Evans
Oates
Wilson
Bowers
Byrd
Balchen
McKinley
Dufek
Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station
Hillary
V. Fuchs
Pole of Cold
Vostok Station
Pole of inaccessibility
Pole of Inaccessibility Station
Tolstikov
Crary
A. Fuchs
Messner
Authority control
WorldCat
VIAF : 37220550
LCCN : n50032732
GND : 11878269X
Categories
Use dmy dates from July 2011
Use Australian English from July 2011
All WorldHeritage articles written in Australian English
Articles with hCards
Commons category template with no category set
Commons category without a link on Wikidata
WorldHeritage articles with VIAF identifiers
WorldHeritage articles with LCCN identifiers
WorldHeritage articles with GND identifiers
VIAF not on Wikidata
1882 births
1958 deaths
Australian explorers
Australian geologists
Explorers of Antarctica
Fellows of the Australian Academy of Science
Fellows of the Royal Society
Officers of the Order of the British Empire
People from Adelaide
Knights Bachelor
Jubilee 150 Walkway
Sole survivors
People educated at Fort Street High School
People from Shipley, West Yorkshire
English explorers
Help improve this article
Sourced from World Heritage Encyclopedia™ licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0
Help to improve this article, make contributions at the Citational Source
This article was sourced from Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. World Heritage Encyclopedia content is assembled from numerous content providers, Open Access Publishing, and in compliance with The Fair Access to Science and Technology Research Act (FASTR), Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., Public Library of Science, The Encyclopedia of Life, Open Book Publishers (OBP), PubMed, U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Center for Biotechnology Information, U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health (NIH), U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, and USA.gov, which sources content from all federal, state, local, tribal, and territorial government publication portals (.gov, .mil, .edu). Funding for USA.gov and content contributors is made possible from the U.S. Congress, E-Government Act of 2002.
 
Crowd sourced content that is contributed to World Heritage Encyclopedia is peer reviewed and edited by our editorial staff to ensure quality scholarly research articles.
 
By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. World Heritage Encyclopedia™ is a registered trademark of the World Public Library Association, a non-profit organization.
 
Categories
Antarctica
South Australia Kangaroo Island, Adelaide Hills, States and territories of Australia, Government of South Australia, Fleurieu Peninsula
Robert Falcon Scott Antarctica, Ernest Shackleton, Roald Amundsen, Royal Navy, South Africa
Ernest Shackleton Antarctica, Robert Falcon Scott, Roald Amundsen, Elephant Island, Buenos Aires
Australasian Antarctic Expedition
Suggestions
Far Eastern Party Australasian Antarctic Expedition, Roald Amundsen, Adélie Land, Ernest Shackleton, Amundsen's South Pole expedition
Nimrod Expedition Roald Amundsen, Ernest Shackleton, Robert Falcon Scott, Fridtjof Nansen, Australasian Antarctic Expedition
List of Antarctic expeditions Antarctica, Robert Falcon Scott, Ernest Shackleton, James Cook, Farthest South
Roald Amundsen Antarctica, Royal Norwegian Navy, Robert Falcon Scott, Ernest Shackleton, Fridtjof Nansen
SY Aurora Antarctica, Australasian Antarctic Expedition, Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition, Ernest Shackleton, New Zealand
Related Books
Early Kings of Norway By: Thomas Carlyle
Jumblies, The By: Edward Lear
Scrambles Amongst the Alps in the Years 1860-69 By: Edward Whymper
Bible (KJV) 09: 1 Samuel By: King James Version
Short Poetry Collection 059 By: Various
About Us
Privacy Policy
Contact Us
Copyright ©
World Public Library.   All rights reserved. eBooks from World Public Library are sponsored by the World Public Library Association ,
a 501c(4) Member's Support Non-Profit Organization, and is NOT affiliated with any governmental agency or department.