MAR
JUN
SEP
20
2015
2016
2017
13 captures
4 Jul 15 - 13 Sep 16
Close Help
Skip to main menu Skip to main content
Where in Antarctica?
See where ANI is based and where our Experiences take you.
View ANI Locations Map
x
Search
Looking for something in particular?
Enter a keyword, location, activity, Experience, or trip code to search our site:
Search
Adventure Network International
Antarctic Experiences
Why Choose ANI
Antarctic Info
Latest News
Home
Gallery
FAQ
Forms
Contact Us
Search
Antarctic Experiences ranging from guided tours to fully supported expeditions.
Antarctic Odyssey
Emperor Penguins
Emperors & Explorers
South Pole Flights
South Pole Overnight
Mount Vinson
Mount Sidley
Climb Antarctica
Ski Antarctica
Ski Last Degree
Ski South Pole—Hercules
Ski South Pole—Messner
Ski South Pole—Axel Heiberg
The Ice Marathon & 100K
Combo Experiences
Custom Expeditions
ANI has a long history of delivering top quality Antarctic Adventures as well as providing Antarctic Logistical solutions.
Flight Schedule
Our Locations
Union Glacier Camp
Vinson Base Camp
South Pole Camp
Gould Bay (Emperor Penguin) Camp
Punta Arenas, Chile
Salt Lake City Office
ANI Locations Map
Our Team
Our History
Visitor Guidelines
Biosecurity
Environmental Sustainability
Aircraft, Vehicles and Equipment
Aircraft
Tents and Structures
Passenger and Light Transport
Tractors and Snow Clearing
Weather Stations
Safety and Medical Support
Non-Commercial and Government Support
Resources and information about Antarctica and Antarctic travel
About Antarctic Travel
The Antarctic Environment
Blue-ice Airfields
The Antarctic Treaty
Useful Links
Map Resources
Beacons in Antarctica
Travel Insurance
Travelex Insurance
Travel Guard Insurance
Discover Polar Explorers
Roald Amundsen
Liv Arnesen
Col. Jatinder Kumar (JK) Bajaj
Fabian Gottlieb von Bellingshausen
Admiral Richard E. Byrd
Apsley Cherry-Garrard
Artur Chilingarov
Tom Crean
Adrien de Gerlache
Lincoln Ellsworth
P.O. Edgar Evans
Wilhelm Filchner
Sir Vivian Fuchs
Helmer Hanssen
Sir Edmund Hillary
James Francis "Frank" Hurley
Fredrik Hjalmar Johansen
Captain C.A. Larsen
Mikhail Lazarev
General (R) Javier Lopetegui
Dr Alexander Macklin
Xavier Mertz
Nathaniel B. Palmer
Herbert Ponting
Sir James Clark Ross
Nobu Shirase
Harald Ulrik Sverdrup
Dr. Charles Swithinbank
Polar Trivia
You are here
Home » Antarctic Info » Discover Polar Explorers » Xavier Mertz
Xavier Mertz
Australian Antarctic Expedition 1911-1913
Xavier Mertz (1882 – 1913)
Xavier Mertz was a Swiss explorer from Basel.
He took part in the Far Eastern Party, a 1912–13 sledging journey of the Australasian Antarctic Expedition (AAE), which claimed his life.
The Mertz Glacier is named after him.
As a young man, Mertz studied law and science, specialising in glacier and mountain formations.
Mertz was an active skier, competing in national competitions, and a mountaineer, climbing many of the highest peaks in the Alps.
Australian Antarctic Expedition - The First Year
In early 1911, Mertz was hired by geologist and explorer Douglas Mawson.
Mawson had served as physicist during Ernest Shackleton's 1908–09 Nimrod Expedition and was planning his own Australasian Antarctic Expedition.
Mertz was initially employed as a ski instructor, but instead joined Belgrave Ninnis in the care of the expedition's Greenland Huskies.
The Aurora sailed from Hobart, Australia on December 2, 1911.
She stopped briefly at Macquarie Island, where a wireless relay base was established, and reached the site of the expedition's main base at Cape Denison in Adélie Land, on the Antarctic continent, in early January.
The men of the AAE wintered over in what was later proven to be the windiest place on Earth (at least at sea level), with gusts up to 200 mph (320 kph).
Through these months they prepared for the summer sledging expeditions.
Mertz helped Ninnis to care for the dogs, teaching them to run in teams on days when the weather was good, sewing harnesses and preparing sledging foods when the winds returned.
Death during the Far Eastern Journey
On October 27, 1912, Mawson outlined the summer sledging program.
Mertz and Ninnis were selected for Mawson’s ambitious Far Eastern journey, which would use the dogs to push quickly to the east of the expedition's base in Commonwealth Bay, towards Victoria Land.
They aimed to reach the location of Mawson’s previous journey from the east four years before.
The party departed Cape Denison on November 10, heading first to Aladdin's Cave (depot), and from there south-east towards a massive glacier encountered by Aurora on the outward journey.
Mertz skied ahead, scouting and providing a lead for the dogs to chase; Mawson and Ninnis manoeuvred the two dog teams behind.
They crossed one, and then another larger glacier, all the while travelling in poor light and strong winds.
By December 14, the party was more than 311 miles (501 km) from the Cape Denison hut.
As Mertz skied ahead, Ninnis, along with the largest sledge and the strongest dog team, broke through a snow bridge and were lost in a crevasse.
Mawson and Mertz were now severely compromised; on the remaining sledge they had just ten days' worth of food, no shelter, and no food for the dogs.
They immediately turned back west, gradually using the six remaining dogs to supplement their food supply.
They initially made good progress, but Mawson became snowblind and both men fell ill.
Mertz's condition worsened and by December 30, Mawson recorded that Mertz was "generally in a very bad condition.
Skin coming off legs, etc".
On the evening of January 7, 1913, Mertz became delerious and died.
Mawson buried Mertz in his sleeping bag under rough-hewn blocks of snow, along with the remaining photographic plates and an explanatory note, then set off to cover the final 100 miles (160 km) to the hut.
Mawson staggered back into the Cape Denison hut a month later, missing the Aurora by a matter of hours.
Legacy
Mawson and the six men remaining at Cape Denison erected a memorial cross for Mertz and Ninnis on Azimuth Hill to the north-west of the main hut.
The first glacier the Far Eastern Party crossed on the outward journey—previously unnamed—was named by Mawson after Mertz, becoming the Mertz Glacier.
The cause of Mertz's death is not certain, however the commonly purported theory is hypervitaminosis A (an excessive intake of vitamin A) from consuming the livers of the Huskies.
Other theories suggest he may have died from a combination of malnutrition, a change in diet, cold exposure, and psychological stresses.
More Info
Mawson, Douglas: The Home of the Blizzard.
www.gutenberg.org/files/6137/6137-h/6137-h.htm | https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/m/mawson/douglas/home/complete.html
Turney, Chris: 1912: The Year the World Discovered Antarctica
Featured Experience
Mount Vinson
Climb Antarctica's highest peak, one of the Seven Summits
Learn More »
Tags: Extremely Strenuous, Climbing/Mountaineering, Seven Summits, Mountains, Mount Vinson
View more experiences
Latest Photos
Wondering what the ANI Antarctic experience is like?
Have a look through our photostream.
View More ANI Photos
Contact Adventure Network International
We’re always happy to hear from you, whether you have questions or need help preparing for your trip.
Give us a call (9am - 5pm MT ), or send us an email anytime.
Telephone: (801) 266 4876
International: +1 (801) 266 4876
Contact us now by e-mail
Join our newsletter and stay up-to-date.
Submit
© Adventure Network International 2016—All Rights Reserved
Salt Lake City UT 84107 USA
Privacy Policy
Media Requests
Contact Us
Site Map
Site Credits
Staff