Real Fairy Pictures: The Cottingley Fairies & Other Photos of Real Fairies
Real Fairy Pictures: The Cottingley Fairies & Other Photos of Real Fairies
Updated on April 18, 2016
Real Fairies Caught on Film?
Do you believe in fairies? You know...those tiny illusive creatures who live between the veil of this world and another? For centuries, maybe even millennia, people all across the world have believed and seen the "wee folk" or what are more commonly referred to as fairies. Some have even claimed to have captured two particular types of fairies - pixies and gnomes on film! Whether you believe the fairy pictures are real or not is entirely up to you...here are some of their fairy tales...errrr...stories.
Elsie with a Cottingley Fairy
2nd photo of Frances with the Cottingley Fairies
The 5th and Final 'Real' Fairy Photo, Taken by Frances
The Notorious Cottingley Fairies' Photographs
The Cottingley Fairies' photographs were a collection of five photographs taken by two young girls in Cottingley, England in 1917 through the early 1920s. The two young girls were ages ten and sixteen and were cousins. Apparently they wanted to have a bit of fun and at the same time prove the existence of fairies to their relatives, so they took some pictures of what they claimed to be fairies, or pixies, to be exact. These fairy pictures caused these young girls to acquire fame very quickly.
There were a total of five fairy photographs taken by Elsie and Frances while in Cottingley, England. The two top fairy photos here are of the two most famous of the set. To me it is obvious that these fairy pictures were fakes; however, the European people of the roaring twenties thought that these fairy photos were the real deal and even skeptics admitted to believing in fairies, after viewing these photographs.
The word spread like wildfire that these two girls had snapped pictures of real fairies living in England and even Sir Arthur Conan Doyle (of Sherlock Holmes fame) preached the word that the fairies were a real species! The girls admitted later that the first four fairy pictures of the five were pretend and that they felt so bad for so many people believing in them, that they kep going along with the idea. It was meant to be all in good fun when they snapped the fairy photographs, using cut-outs of a magazine and hat pins to position the fairies in various ways.
The last fairy picture posted here was the fifth and final photograph, taken by Frances Griffiths. This photograph was said to be the one and only true photo of fairies. Frances Griffiths apparently claimed that this one was real until her death. You can watch the interview with Frances' daughter to the right. The difference of the four fake fairy photographs as compared to the alleged real fairy photograph is that the first four have fairies with opaque bodies and wings and in the fifth photograph the fairies are translucent. Some theories have been drawn up that state that the effect came from a double-exposure but I am no expert on film and photography methods. It is very intriguing to me to learn that though Frances admitted to faking the first four fairy photographs, she would not let go of the fact that the fifth fairy photograph was indeed real. She believed in fairies and so did Elsie and that was the main reason they began taking the photographs to begin with...to prove that they existed. Even if it meant faking the first four photographs to prove that fairies live.
Dan Baines Fairy Hoax