FEB
JUN
Jul
21
2015
2016
2017
2 captures
29 Feb 16 - 21 Jun 16
Close Help
Skip to main content
Anomalies: the Strange & Unexplained
Keeping the Paranormal Real
Anomalies is supported by Patrons and by Donations from People Like You.
You are here
Home » Chronology Stories
Click Here to Donate to Anomalies
-or-
Support ANOMALIES
by Becoming a Patron
at Patreon.com!
Patron Login
Anomalies Patrons get:
Full View of Hidden Articles in Development!
Free eBooks from Anomalies!
Green Children of Woolpit
Blue Skin
From The
Sub-Index
Special Groupings
Fairies and Little People
Paranormal Images
Real Monsters
Bookmark This Page
Tweet
Search form
Search
Shirts and Stickers available now!
Latest Anomalies eBook:
Blue Skin: an Anomalies study
Also Available:
The Green Children of Woolpit
.99¢ eBooks Available on Amazon!
Terms & Conventions used in Anomalies Articles
'Like' Anomalies on Facebook to be Notified of New Stories!
1917, July: The Cottingley Fairies
The Legend:
In July 1917, 16-year-old Elsie Wright and her 10-year-old cousin Frances Griffiths were tired of being chided by Elsie's father over their claims of seeing fairies... so they took a photograph of some to prove their existence.
        The girls lived together in Cottingley, on the outskirts of Bradford, West Yorkshire, England. They often played together in the small wooded creek behind Elsie's home, and this is where they saw the fairies. On a day in July, Elsie, tired of her father's dismissive attitude to her and Frances' claims, borrowed her father's camera to take a picture. When the film was developed later in her father's dark room, Elsie's parents were in for a surprise; the picture that she had taken was of Frances... with a troop of fairies dancing in front of her.
        Elsie's parents were flabbergasted; but her father wasn't convinced. So, a month later, Frances took a picture of Elsie which clearly showed her playing with a gnome.
        Mr. Wright still wasn't convinced, and there the matter settled. The girls showed the pictures to their friends, but no particular interest was ever raised by them... at least, not until two years had passed.
        Elsie's mother had developed an interest in things supernatural, and took the pictures to share with a Theosophist meeting in Bradford one evening. In no time at all, the pictures were the center of attention and argument. Of the people who believed the fairies were real, the most prominent and vocal was Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, creator of Sherlock Holmes. Sir Arthur printed the first two pictures in Strand Magazine in 1920 to help support his argument for the existence of fairies; this article made the story a worldwide sensation.
        In 1920, Sir Arthur arranged for Elsie and Frances to once again be given a camera and left on their own in the small creek. The results were three more photos of the fairies; the last to be made, for shortly after Elsie and Frances moved away from one another and stopped seeing fairies. Sir Arthur later printed these three pictures in a sequel to his earlier article, and, in 1922, he expanded the two articles into a book, The Coming of the Fairies.
The Rest of the Story
In Their Own Words
Theories
Cottingley Fairies (sources)
‹ Reverend Mr. Harris and the Stray Sod (sources) up The Rest of the Story ›
Google Plus One
Pinterest
Share on Facebook
Tweet Widget
Even More Anomalies!
1891 (pub): The Footless and Blind Champions
1816: Snowfall Predicted Accidentally
1843, July 9: The Miser’s Safe
PLEASE NOTE: All articles in the Anomalies database and it's sub-databases (Mysteries, Curiosities, and Legends) are written by Garth Haslam , and should not be copied in any format without his express permission. If you use Anomalies or any of it's sub-databases for research, please be sure to list Anomalies and it's URL -- http://anomalyinfo.com -- in your references. These articles are written by and copyright (c)1996-2015 Garth Haslam, all rights reserved. Web page design, logo/link art by Garth Haslam, September 1996-2015; he can be emailed by Clicking Here .
Administrators only.
Powered by Drupal