MAR
JUN
AUG
20
2015
2016
2017
16 captures
22 Aug 15 - 13 Oct 16
Close Help
School and Library Subscribers
JOIN
LOGIN
Activate Your Free Trial!
stories
quizzes
galleries
lists
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
British author
Written by: Philip K. Wilson Last Updated
5-5-2015
Read
View All Media (7)
Conan Doyle, Sir ArthurEncyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, in full Arthur Ignatius Conan Doyle (born May 22, 1859, Edinburgh , Scotland —died July 7, 1930, Crowborough , Sussex, England ) Scottish writer best known for his creation of the detective Sherlock Holmes —one of the most vivid and enduring characters in English fiction.
Conan Doyle, the second of Charles Altamont and Mary Foley Doyle’s 10 children, began seven years of Jesuit education in Lancashire, England, in 1868. After an additional year of schooling in Feldkirch, Austria, Conan Doyle returned to Edinburgh. Through the influence of Dr. Bryan Charles Waller, his mother’s lodger, he prepared for entry into the University of Edinburgh’s ... (100 of 1,053 words)
Images
About Us
About Our Ads
Partner Program
Contact Us
Privacy Policy
Terms of Use
©2016 Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.
MEDIA FOR:
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
Citation
MLA
APA
Harvard
Chicago
Email
To:
From:
Comment:
You have successfully emailed this.
Error when sending the email. Try again later.
Citations
MLA style:
"Sir Arthur Conan Doyle". Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016. Web. 20 Jun. 2016
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Arthur-Conan-Doyle>.
APA style:
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. (2016). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/biography/Arthur-Conan-Doyle
Harvard style:
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. 2016. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Retrieved 20 June, 2016, from http://www.britannica.com/biography/Arthur-Conan-Doyle
Chicago Manual of Style:
Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "Sir Arthur Conan Doyle", accessed June 20, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/biography/Arthur-Conan-Doyle.
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Update
Link
Click anywhere inside the article to add text or insert superscripts, subscripts, and special characters.
You can also highlight a section and use the tools in this bar to modify existing content:
Add links to related Britannica articles!
You can double-click any word or highlight a word or phrase in the text below and then select an article from the search box.
Or, simply highlight a word or phrase in the article, then enter the article name or term you'd like to link to in the search box below, and select from the list of results.
Note: we do not allow links to external resources in editor.
Please click the Web sites link for this article to add citations for
external Web sites.
Editing Tools:
Tips for Editing
Leave Edit Mode
Submit
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles.
You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind:
Encyclopaedia Britannica articles are written in a neutral, objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
Email this page
Cancel
Send
×