Mar
APR
May
6
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
6 Apr 16 - 6 Apr 16
Close Help
this day in history
historical facts
did you know?
travel tips
video
jitt.travel
JiTT cities among the top 50 best cities to live in
A beginner’s guide to JiTT.travel – Milan Edition
JiTT.travel is running for National Public Champion at the European Business Awards
traveling stories
#2 Top Travel Chill-Out Spots by Alex
On the Trans-Siberian from Moscow to Irkutsk.
Following the footsteps of Michael Strogoff
Russia by mouth – what to eat while visiting Moscow
did you know?
Why do we eat chocolate eggs and chocolate bunnies by Easter?
Celebrating St. Patrick’s Day in NYC
20 Philadelphia Firsts
travel tips
#2 Top Travel Chill-Out Spots by Alex
10 Best Hanami Party Spots in Tokyo
Russia by mouth – what to eat while visiting Moscow
Travel Tech
Startup I.D. – trip4real
A personal touch to your travel experience
Taking baggage handling to the next level
By Ana this day in history
December 11, 2015
Edward VIII abdicates
Edward VIII.
© Rabidbadger | Dreamstime.com
Edward VIII’s abdication as King of the United Kingdom becomes effective on this day in 1936.
He was the first English monarch to voluntarily abdicate the throne.
The eldest son of King George V, he ruled for less than one year.
An abdication crisis arose as Edward VIII was intent on marrying Wallis Simpson, an American socialite who was twice-divorced.
Because of her past failed marriages Simpson was perceived to be unsuitable as a consort.
Despite opposition from the royal family, the British government and the Church of England, of which Edward VIII was the nominal head, the monarch remained adamant.
Their affair was kept secret for several years, but then openly discussed in Parliament at the beginning of December, after news of it broke on the front pages of British newspapers.
With no resolution in sight, Edward renounced the throne.
In his abdication speech, he said: “I have found it impossible to carry the heavy burden of responsibility and to discharge my duties as king, as I would wish to do, without the help and support of the woman I love”.
The following day his younger brother Albert, who took the regnal name of George VI, was proclaimed king.
He is the father of the reigning British monarch, Elizabeth II.
Edward married Simpson in June of the following year and remained married until his death, 35 years later.
As the capital of the then British Empire, London was center stage for this plot.
To learn more about this fascinating city, home to many intriguing stories, download JiTT London .
Tags
abdication crisis edward viii jitt london united kingdom wallis simpson
Share on
Facebook
Twitter
Pinterest
Google +
LinkedIn
Email
Bio
Latest Posts
Ana
Ana loves traveling, reading about traveling, and writing about traveling.
Sometimes we think she needs to expand her range of interests, but then she travels some more and has the most fantastic stories to tell!
Latest Posts By Ana
Startup I.D. – trip4real
Russia by mouth – what to eat while visiting Moscow
Brotherly travel
Previous articleFirst Nobel Prize Awarded
Next articleMona Lisa returns home
You may also like
First Ball Drop
Beyond the Milky Way
London blitzed
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.
Required fields are marked *
Comment
Name *
Email *
Website
JiTT.travel Experiences
Powered by Viator | TripAdvisor Company
https://www.partner.viator.com/widgets/pas.jspa
https://www.partner.viator.com
87a15989
en
14004
Find things to do
0
223
FFFFFF
054D66
true
Social
8248likes
1227followers
658followers
Follow us
Follow @jitt_guide
Featured Posts
Travel Tech Startup I.D. – trip4real
travel tips , traveling stories #2 Top Travel Chill-Out Spots by Alex
travel tips 10 Best Hanami Party Spots in Tokyo
JiTT.travel Best Deals
Powered by Booking.com
Topics
apps architecture art business cinema crafts & design culture food heritage literature music nature politics science sports technology tourism
Podcasts
Authors
Cristina Baptista
Rafael Vigário
Filipe Penicheiro
Yuan Tian
Ana Sofia Amorim
Joana Sobral
Karl Smyth
Alexandre Pinto
Rui Castro
More Stories
Attention shopaholics: It’s Black Friday!
Shops open early, there are discounts from another world, huge queues of people searching for products of all types, from smartphones to clothing and…
Video
A beginner’s guide to JiTT.travel - Milan Edition
About Journal
The most important bag you can take on your trip is surely our mind.
The JiTT Journal is your perfect travel retailer: you can pick up practical advice, cultural information and to find the most exciting destinations and travel choices you can do to make your life the perfect remedy against boredom.
Latest Posts
Startup I.D. – trip4real
#2 Top Travel Chill-Out Spots by Alex
10 Best Hanami Party Spots in Tokyo
Newsletter
JiTT.travel Cities
amsterdam barcelona beijing berlin boston istanbul lisbon london los angeles milan moscow munich new york paris rio de janeiro rome san francisco são paulo st. petersburg sydney tokyo vienna
Powered by JiTT.travel
Back to top
Subscribe to our newsletter
×