DEC
APR
May
6
2015
2016
2017
3 captures
8 Dec 15 - 8 Apr 16
Close Help
Anglotopia.net
The Website for People Who Love Britain - Anglophiles
Menu
Home
About
First Time Here?
Contact
Advertise
History of Anglotopia
Newsletter
Disclaimer
Press Room
Close
Sections
Anglophilia
Anglotopia Long Reads
Desktop Wallpapers
Anglophile Alerts
Anglophile 101
Anglophile Deals
Anglophile Gear
Anglophile Zen
Brit Crafts
Great Britons
Brit Knits
British Food
British TV
BBC
Downton Abbey
Doctor Who News
British TV Videos
Foyle’s War
Top Gear
History
Great Britons
Winston Churchill
British Literature
British Empire
British Military
English Language
Royal History
Shakespeare
Travel
Great British Houses
Our Trips
Travel Guides
Travel Tips
Trip Planning
Travel Videos
Places to Stay
Family Travel
Visit Britain
Royals
The Queen
Prince Harry
Prince George
Royal Couple – Will & Kate
Royal Family
Royal History
Royal Traditions
Reviews
Brit DVD Reviews
Brit Book Reviews
Brit Movie Reviews
Brit TV Reviews
Brit Music Reviews
Attraction Reviews
Videos
British TV Videos
British Movie Videos
Royal Videos
Slow TV
Travel Videos
Travels in Britain
Weekend Viewing
Close
Blog
Most Recent Articles on Anglotopia
Brit Movies: The BFG Official Trailer – Video
The Travel Fiver: Five Things to Do in Glasgow Scotland
British Legends: A Brief Guide to Everything King Arthur
One Anglophile’s Take on Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.
Motorhead’s last tour to be given CD and DVD release
Anglotees Alert: New Designs LIVE – Forever England and Flower Union Jack
Anglotopia Magazine: British Telly Steaming – 5 New British Comedies to Binge Watch Immediately
Carnegie Hall to host tribute to David Bowie
Top Gear: New Top Gear Series Trailer With New Hosts – Video
Brit Music: The Full Lineup of the Glastonbury 2016 Festival Announced
Close
Videos
Recent Videos
Brit Movies: The BFG Official Trailer – Video
Top Gear: New Top Gear Series Trailer With New Hosts – Video
Lost in the Pond: 11 Words Americans Love Asking Brits to Say – Video
Brit Movies: Jane Austen Novella Love & Friendship Now a Film – Official Trailer Inside – Video
Brit Movies: The Bridget Jones’s Baby Official Trailer is Here – Video
7 British Swear Words Americans Should Use At Work – YouTube
English Language: How far back in time could you go and still understand English?
Lost in the Pond: A British Expat Provides Advice for Americans Traveling to England – Video
Friday Fun: Best British Train Driver Announcement Ever – Video
Brit Movies: First Teaser Trailer for Absolutely Fabulous Movie Released – Video
Close
Tours
Top UK Tour Operators
Top London West End Plays
Top London West End Musicals
Top London Tours
Top Day Trips from London
Anglophile Recommendations
UK Lodging Recommendations
Close
Slang
Top British Slang Articles
Top 100 Most Beautiful British Slang Words
Top 50 Most Beautiful British Insults
Ultimate List of Funny and Rude British Place Names
Language: Top 100 Cockney Rhyming Slang Words and Phrases
British Baby Lingo
Brit Language: How to Swear like a Brit
Brit Slang: Graphic Shows Some Basic Differences Between American and British English
13 Brilliant British Slang Words and Phrases Coined by British TV Shows
“My What a Twee Little Cottage” – 65 British English Slang Words For Use Around the House
British Slang in the Bedroom – Big List of 71 British English Words Related To Sex
33 British Slang Words and Phrases You’ll Want to Starting Using Regularly Today Because They’re Awesome
British Slang: 48 British Words For Driving That You May Not Know
Check Out Our Slang Dictionary!
Check out Anglotopia's Dictionary of British Slang - Your Complete Guide to over 1,000 British Slang Words and Phrases.
Available from All Major Retailers.
Click here for more info
Buy Now In Print
Buy From Amazon.com
Buy Now for Your Kindle
Buy Now for iPad -
Close
Columns
Long Reads
Anglotopia Magazine: Great British Icons – A History of the Red Telephone Box
More Long Reads
Dispatches from England
Dispatches from England: My Favorite Memories From Living in England – Nicole’s Final Dispatch from England
Read More Dispatches from England
The Fiver
The Travel Fiver: Five Things to Do in Glasgow Scotland
Read More from The Fiver
Lost in the Pond
Lost in the Pond: 11 Words Americans Love Asking Brits to Say – Video
Read More Lost in the Pond
British Landscapes
British Landscapes Photography: Creative Clouds
See More British Landscapes
Close
Inspiration
Great British Houses
Great British Houses: Wokefield Park
More Great Houses
Great Britons
Great Britons: Aldous Huxley – Author of Brave New World
More Great Britons
Photos of Britain
Desktop Wallpaper: Radcliffe Camera View in Oxford England For Your Desktop Wallpaper
See More Photos of Britain
Inspirational Videos
Friday Inspiration: Show Me Britain – The Lake District – Video
Click to View More Videos
Great British Art
Brit Movies: One Anglophile’s Take on Mr. Turner – Review
See More Great British Art
Close
Regions
South East England
Berkshire
Buckinghamshire
East Sussex
Hampshire
Isle of Wight
Kent
Oxfordshire
Surrey
Sussex
West Sussex
South West England
Cornwall
Cotswolds
Devon
Dorset
Gloucestershire
Somerset
Wiltshire
Midlands
Bedfordshire
Derbyshire
Herefordshire
Hertfordshire
Leicestershire
Lincolnshire
Northamptonshire
Rutland
Shropshire
Staffordshire
Warwickshire
East Anglia
Norfolk
Suffolk
Cambridgeshire
Essex
North East England
Yorkshire
County Durham
Northumbria
Tyne and Wear
North West England
Cheshire
Cumbria
Lake District
Lancashire
Liverpool
Manchester
Scotland
Edinburgh
Glasgow
Wales
Cardiff
Pembrokeshire
Northern Ireland
Belfast
Islands
Channel Islands
Jersey
Isle of Man
Isles of Scilly
Close
London
Latest from Londontopia
Anglotees Alert: New Designs LIVE – Forever England and Flower Union Jack
Anglotopia Magazine: What’s in a Name?
The Various Names of London Throughout History
Ten Interesting Facts about Fortnum & Mason You Might Not Know
Video: Gorgeous New Timelapse of London Shows London Glowing in the Night
Anglotees Alert: New Design LIVE – London Dreams and Welsh Heritage
Close
Travel
Travel
Travel Guides
Events
Laura’s London
London
London Trip Planning
Days Out
Family Travel
Outdoor Activities
Trains
Travel Tips
Trip Planning
British Airways
Attractions
Great British Houses
Stately Homes
Castles
Cathedrals
Museums
Theme Parks
Coast
Palaces
Restuarants
Royal
Lodging
Hotels
Hostels
Self-catering
Bed and Breakfasts
Our Trips
An English Christmas Trip
Training for Hadrian’s Wall
Jubilee 2012 Trip
Royal Wedding Trip Diaries
Trip to England – July 2010
Trip to England 2009
Close
Anglotees
Introducing Anglotees
Anglotees is our new business that offers up 1 British Themed T-shirt to buy a week and available only for 1 week.
This Week's Shirts - 2 New Designs
This week we're offering 2 new designs.
Starting at $16.99.
Available in Men's, Women's, V-neck, Long Sleeve, Sweatshirt and Hoodie.
Click here to buy
Close
You are here: Home / Site News / Featured / Great Events in British History: The Abdication Crisis of Edward VIII: The Romance over Royalty That Changed the Course of British Monarchy
Great Events in British History: The Abdication Crisis of Edward VIII: The Romance over Royalty That Changed the Course of British Monarchy
November 27, 2015
By Jonathan Leave a Comment
In 1936, the charismatic new King, Edward VIII, announced to his advisors his intention of marrying his mistress, Wallis Simpson.
Not since Henry VIII resolved to marry Anne Boleyn had a royal marriage threatened to wreak such havoc on the country.
Henry was able to force his will on the kingdom.
400 years later, Edward found that his personal desires were no match for the State’s, and he was obliged to abdicate, opening the way for a new royal family who would endear themselves to the nation.
Key Facts about the Abdication Crisis
Key Dates
January 1931 First meeting of Prince of Wales and Mrs. Wallis Simpson
20 January 1936 Death of George V. Edward VIII succeeds him
July 1936 Simpson leaves the family home
August 1936 Foreign newspapers print photographs of the King and Wallis
27 October 1936 Simpsons granted a decree nisi
November 1936 The King informs Prime Minister he wants a morganatic marriage
November 1936 King’s proposal rejected by governments of Britain and Dominions
2 December 1936 King informed of the decision
3 December 1936 British Press break the story and Mrs. Simpson leaves for France
9 December 1936 Edward tells government he intends to abdicate
10 December 1936 Instrument of Abdication signed and House of Commons informed
11 December 1936 Edward broadcasts his decision to the nation
12 December 1936 Edward’s brother Albert proclaimed as King George VI
12 December 1936 Edward, now Duke of Windsor, travels to Austria
3 June 1937 Edward and Wallis Simpson marry in France
Key Figures
Edward, Prince of Wales, briefly King of the United Kingdom and Dominions, Emperor of India, later Duke of Windsor.
Bessie Wallis Warfield, later Wallis Spencer, then Wallis Simpson and finally, Wallis, Duchess of Windsor.
King George V
Queen Mary
Stanley Baldwin, Prime Minister
Prince Albert, Duke of York, later King George VI
Elizabeth, Duchess of York, later Queen Elizabeth
A Burden Too Heavy Without the Help and Support of the Woman He Loved
Edward and Wallis
Edward, known as David to his family and friends, was born on 23 June, 1894.
His great-grandmother, Queen Victoria, was still on the throne and his grandfather, Edward, Prince of Wales, was waiting impatiently in the wings.
Young Edward’s parents were the Duke and Duchess of York, who would later become King George V and Queen Mary.
As a child, Edward enjoyed an affectionate, albeit distant, relationship with his parents and grandparents.
He was taught by tutors until his early teens, when he was sent first to Osborne Naval College and then Dartmouth Naval College to prepare him for a career in the Royal Navy.
This plan was cut short in 1910 when his grandfather died.
16 year old Edward was created Prince of Wales and sent to Magdalen College, Oxford to better prepare him for his role as future king.
His academic career was not a great success; whilst he enjoyed the University’s polo club, he did not manage to obtain a degree.
At the outbreak of the Great War, the Prince of Wales was determined to serve his country.
He had joined the Grenadier Guards and appealed to be allowed to join the front line.
His request was turned down since the government could not countenance the risk of the heir to the throne being captured by the enemy.
Edward was allowed to serve behind the lines and occasionally managed to reach the front.
Later, he flew military aircraft.
Unlike the government, he was sanguine about the dangers and was said to have quipped “What difference does it make if I am killed?
The King has three other sons!”
This carefree attitude won him a good deal of popularity among the troops, who were proud of the Prince who won the Military Cross.
Following the war, Edward travelled around Britain and the Empire as his father’s representative.
Good looking, sporty and unattached, he became a favourite with photographers and gossip columnists, achieving celebrity status.
Unlike his stern parents, he was affable and suited the modernity of the “roaring twenties”.
The people may have loved his personality, but his character was giving his parents and their advisors cause for concern.
Edward, rather like his grandfather and namesake Edward VII, had grown into a womanizer.
His affairs with married women appalled his strait-laced father who began to favour his second son, the quiet and respectably married Albert.
King George went so far as to declare that he hoped Edward never had children so that Albert and his wife could eventually succeed to the throne.
The King also predicted that Edward would ruin himself within a year of his father’s death.
In 1931, Edward met the woman who would turn George V’s hopes and fears into reality.
Wallis Simpson was a vivacious and charming American socialite, possessed a quick wit, effortless elegance and, according to some, endless ambition.
Early in 1931, Wallis and Edward met for the first time at a dinner party hosted by Edward’s mistress, Lady Furness.
Over the next few years Edward and Mrs. Simpson chanced upon each other at society events.
Edward developed a fascination with the charming American and it is likely that the pair became lovers when Lady Furness was abroad in 1934.
Part of Wallis’s attraction for the Prince was her lack of deference to his position and he was soon besotted.
Mrs. Simpson had captured the heart of the world’s most eligible bachelor but it was never likely that she would capture his crown.
Wallis was entirely unsuitable as a queen consort.
Even putting aside the malicious gossip about her earlier scandalous escapades in the Far East, there was the fact that she was a divorcee.
As a rule, a divorcee like Wallis would not be allowed at court, much less allowed to marry the monarch.
The growing relationship between the Prince of Wales and Wallis was viewed with alarm by the King, many of the Prince’s old friends and the government.
Special Branch trailed the couple, reporting back on alleged liaisons between Wallis and other men, in the hope that a wedge could be driven between the pair.
Their attempts were unsuccessful.
The Prince’s infatuation continued unabated and began to impact his official duties.
Worse was to come.
King George V died on 20 January 1936 and Edward became King Edward VIII.
He and Wallis watched from a window at St James’ Palace as the proclamation was read.
It was a clear indication that he wanted Wallis by his side.
Although the country at large remained unaware of the King’s affair, to his family, the court and government, the unthinkable became obvious: Edward intended to marry Mrs. Simpson.
Such a marriage was fraught with difficulty, largely because the monarch was the Supreme Head of the Church of England and the Church did not allow the remarriage of divorced people whose spouses were living.
Edward and Wallis plowed on with their plans.
Wallis sued for divorce on the grounds of her husband’s adultery and was granted a decree nisi in October 1936.
In Edward’s mind, one hurdle to his marriage had been crossed.
He turned his attention to the next and came up with a plan he felt would answer his critics.
In November 1936, Edward met his Prime Minister, Stanley Baldwin, and suggested that he might contract a morganatic marriage with Wallis.
This type of marriage would allow Edward to retain the crown, but Wallis would not become queen, instead having a courtesy title.
Any children of the marriage would be excluded from the line of succession.
There was no precedent for such an arrangement in Britain though morganatic marriages were not unheard of in other European kingdoms.
Baldwin told the King that he doubted that the people would accept a marriage to Mrs. Simpson, but undertook to put the King’s proposal to the government of Britain and her Dominions.
Baldwin put three alternatives to the various governments: that the King should be allowed to marry Mrs. Simpson and she become queen; that the King marry Mrs. Simpson in a morganatic marriage or; the King abdicated the throne.
With the exception of New Zealand’s Prime Minister, who felt that the morganatic marriage proposal might work, the first two proposals were rejected.
Mrs. Simpson was seen as an entirely unsuitable spouse for the King.
In Britain, the leaders of the opposition parties also agreed that there could be no marriage between Mrs. Simpson and a reigning King.
Winston Churchill was hopeful that if the matter could be delayed, the King would simply fall out of love with Wallis.
Baldwin was not in favour of delay, wanting a swift resolution to the crisis.
As news spread about the King and Mrs. Simpson, Edward was not entirely without sympathizers.
An unlikely alliance of politicians supported him, ranging from Oswald Mosely and his Union of Fascists to the Communist Party.
Winston Churchill was rumoured to be leading the King’s supporters, but this was pure speculation.
In the Press, and, therefore, the country, opinion was split.
Broadly, the Establishment and the middle-class were against Edward’s marriage to Mrs. Simpson, whilst progressives and the working class were more tolerant of the idea.
Perhaps buoyed by his supporters, Edward made a last-ditch attempt to keep his crown and the woman he loved.
At the beginning of December he drafted a speech in which he put his idea of a morganatic marriage to the public, making it clear that he would prefer to stay on the throne.
The government blocked him from broadcasting the speech, citing constitutional difficulties.
Edward bowed to the inevitable; it was Wallis or the crown and there was no possibility of reconciling the two.
He agreed to abdicate.
The Abdication Letter
On 10 December 1936, Edward signed the abdication documentation with his three younger brothers as witnesses.
His brother Albert became monarch, taking the regnal name George.
The following day, announced as Prince Edward, he addressed the nation, telling the people that he could not carry out the heavy burden of responsibility without the support of the woman he loved.
Edward and Wallis Simpson married the following year in France.
As the Duke and Duchess of Windsor they enjoyed a lavish lifestyle, although they did court controversy for their apparent sympathy for the Nazi regime.
Edward died in 1972 and was buried in the Royal Mausoleum at Frogmore.
The Duchess died in 1986 and was buried with her husband.
Legacy
The abdication of Edward VIII cleared the way for George VI, the result that George V had always wanted.
Although George VI was a shy man, he and his wife, Queen Elizabeth, provided the country with a calm stability during World War II and the Blitz in particular.
George VI also presided over the dismantling of the British Empire and, like his daughter, Elizabeth II, proved to be a popular monarch providing a steady influence in difficult times.
Sites to visit
Fort Belvedere in Windsor Great Park was Edward’s country home, given to him by his father.
Edward and Wallis spent time here together and part of the television series Edward and Mrs. Simpson was filmed in the house.
It was at Belvedere that Edward signed his abdication documents.
The house is currently leased to private tenants, but it is occasionally open to raise money for charities.
The Duke and Duchess of Windsor are buried at Frogmore Mausoleum which is located in the Home Park of Windsor Castle.
Frogmore House, gardens and the Mausoleum are open to the public on a very limited basis.
The annual timetable for opening can be found on the Royal Collection Trust’s website.
The State Rooms at Buckingham Palace are open for tours, making the public more welcome than Mrs. Simpson once was!
Film and TV
In 1981, Edward Fox and Cynthia Harris starred as Edward and Mrs. Simpson in Thames Television’s drama series.
Available on DVD.
Wallis And Edward (2006) stars Joely Richardson and Stephen Campbell Moore.
Available on DVD or to rent from LoveFilm.
Further research
Philip Zeigler had unique access to the Royal Archives for his 2012 biography King Edward VIII.
The book follows Edward from his childhood, through the playboy prince years, up to his death in exile in Paris.
Behind Closed Doors (2011) by Hugo Vickers explores the Duchess of Windsor’s later years, which were marred by the exploitation she suffered at the hands of those charged with her care.
17 Carnations:   The Windsors, The Nazis and the Cover-Up (2015) by Andrew Morton explores Edward and Wallis’ relationship with the Nazi regime.
Related YouTube Videos
Recording of Edward’s abdication speech
Interview with the Duke and Duchess of Windsor
Edward recalls his first meeting with Wallis
Share this:
Email
Facebook
Reddit
Twitter
Pinterest
Pocket
Related
Filed Under: Featured , Great Events in British History , History , Long Reads
About Jonathan
Jonathan is a consummate Anglophile with an obsession for Britain that borders on psychosis.
Anglotopia is his full time job and he's always dreaming of his next trip to England, wishing he lived there -  specifically Dorset - and is always trying to figure out a way to move to England.
It will happen one day.
Keep up with him on Twitter here .
Read More at Anglotopia
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Love British TV?
Connect With Us
Check out our Advertisers!
This Week at Anglotees
This Week's Shirts - 2 New Designs
This week we're offering 2 New Designs to choose from.
Starting at $16.99 Available in Men's, Women's, V-neck, Long Sleeve, Sweatshirt and Hoodie.
Click here to buy
Search our Extensive Archive
Free Weekly Email Newsletter
Latest British News in Your Inbox
Support Anglotopia!
Recent Posts
Brit Movies: The BFG Official Trailer – Video
The Travel Fiver: Five Things to Do in Glasgow Scotland
British Legends: A Brief Guide to Everything King Arthur
One Anglophile’s Take on Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.
Motorhead’s last tour to be given CD and DVD release
Anglotees Alert: New Designs LIVE – Forever England and Flower Union Jack
Anglotopia Magazine: British Telly Steaming – 5 New British Comedies to Binge Watch Immediately
Carnegie Hall to host tribute to David Bowie
Top Gear: New Top Gear Series Trailer With New Hosts – Video
Brit Music: The Full Lineup of the Glastonbury 2016 Festival Announced
Current Exchange Rates
Best Posts on Anglotopia
101 Budget Britain Travel Tips Guidebook
101 London Travel Tips Guidebook
Ultimate List of Funny British Place Names
Top 16 Best Castles in England
Top 100 British Slang Words and Phrases
Top 50 Most Beautiful British Insults
101 Free Things to do in London
Top 100 UK Tourist Attractions
Britain’s World Heritage Sites – Full List
British Stores in the USA
Top British Comedies of All Time
Top 11 Stately Homes in England
Brit Actors I’d Leave My Husband For
Guide to Packing for a Trip to Britain
The Top 12 Castles in Scotland
Top Ten British Chick Flicks
Top 10 Anglophile Movies
Brit TV Adaptations That Failed in the US
Top 13 Best Castles in Wales
Top 100 UK Hotels
Top 100 London Attractions
Our Love Affair with Shaftesbury Dorset Explained
Friends of Anglotopia
Plan a Trip
Cool Stuff!
Find a Brit
Churchill Book
Top Pages
First Time Here?
Anglotees
UK Tour Operators
Doctor Who Blog
101 Budget Britain Tips
101 London Tips
Anglotopia Store
London Blog
Funny British Place Names
Top 100 Brit Slang Words
History of Anglotopia
Top Day Trips from London
Top London Tours
Travel Articles
Guidebooks
101 Budget Britain Tips
Top 100 UK Attractions
The Budget Britain Guide
Travel News
Travel Guides
Places to Stay
London Travel
Days Out
Top 100 London Attractions
Top Day Trips from London
Top London Tours
Avatars by Sterling Adventures
About Us
Anglotopia was founded by Jonathan and Jackie Thomas in 2007 in a closet in Chicago.
Anglotopia is for people who love Britain - whether it's British TV, Culture, History or Travel - we cover it all.
Anglotopia is now our full time jobs and we spend our time working on the site and planning our yearly trips to Britain.
In 2014, we founded Anglotees.com , a new company that offers up unique British T-shirt designs every week.
Join us as we explore Britain and everything it has to offer!
Free Weekly Email Newsletter
Latest British News in Your Inbox
Our Upcoming Trips
At Anglotopia we're always planning our next trip.
Here's a taste of what we have planned:
We're planning a trip to Britain in April/May 2016 to Explore the Midlands and Visit Dorset
Jonathan plans to walk the length of Hadrian's Wall when he can lose 25lbs and walk 10 miles in a day Read about his Training Here
Contact Us!
Interested in advertising on the world's largest website dedicated to all things Britain?
Or maybe you have a story for us or would like to work together.
We want to hear from you!
Reach Us At: E-mail: info@anglotopia.net
As Seen On or In:
Return to top of page
Copyright © 2016 Anglotopia, LLC · Website Developed by Anglotopia, LLC · Log in
Free Weekly Britain Newsletter
Latest British news from Anglotopia right in your email inbox every Tuesday
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.