The Last Judgment (van der Weyden)とは - goo Wikipedia (ウィキペディア)
 [ The Last Judgment (van der Weyden) ] の検索結果 
Last Judgment (van der Weyden)
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
  (Redirected from The Last Judgment (van der Weyden))
Jump to: navigation , search
This article is actively undergoing a major edit for a short while. To help avoid edit conflicts , please do not edit this page while this message is displayed.
This page was last revised at 22:39, 13 November 2013 (UTC) (33 seconds ago). Please remove this template if this page hasn't been edited in several hours. If you are the editor who added this template, please be sure to remove it or replace it with {{Under construction}} between editing sessions.
The Last Judgement, c. 1445-1450. 220cm x 548cm (excluding frames). Oil on oak , Hospices de Beaune .
The six outer panels with the kneeling donors on either side.
The Last Judgment (or The Beaune altarpiece) is a very large polyptych altarpiece painted c. 1445-50 by Rogier van der Weyden . It was executed in oil on oak panel , though parts have been transferred to canvas . The work consists of 15 panels, of which nine are contained in the inner and five on the outer views. It retains its original outer frames.
The altarpiece was commissioned for the Hospices de Beaune in 1443 by Nicolas Rolin , Chancellor of Burgundy, and his wife Guigone de Salins who was buried in the chapel, in front of the altarpiece's original positioning. [1] [2] It remains there today although not in its original position. It is badly damaged through paint loss, darkening of colours, dirt and restorer's over-paint.
At the time, hospitals were largely for the dying, and the spiritual care of patients was at least as important as the treatments of physical ailments. Thus the work served as a moralising reminder for the sick to consider their faith and direct their final thoughts towards the divine.
Contents
5 Sources
Commission[edit]
The inner and outer wings were cut apart so they could be shown together. Traditionally the inner wings would only be displayed on selected Sundays or church holidays.
The polyptych was as intended as the centrepiece for Nicolas Rolin 's chapel at the Hospices de Beaune . A high ranking official at Philip the Good 's court, Rolin was almost 70 and nearing the end of his life when he sought to donate a public hospital to aid the poor and needy and to serve as his memorial. He decided to build a hospice, to be located either in Beaune or Autun . It is not known why he decided to build in eastern France rather than in the Low Countries, although it is likely that it was in a gesture intended to heal wounds between the Burgundian's and the French after the Treaty of Arras . France had been devastated by the wars with the Burgundians and English, and recently suffered another outbreak of plague . [3] The work's first mention in inventory occurs in 1501, when it was mentioned as placed on the high altar. [4]
Although Rolin was born in Autun he eventually decided to build in Beaune, partly because the city had recently been devastated by plague, and lacked such a facility. Having gained permission from Pope Eugene IV , the hospice was built and consecrated on 31 December 1452. In conjunction, Rolin established the "Les sœurs hospitalières de Beaune" religious order. [3]
Description[edit]
The work consists of 15 separate paintings on nine panels painted on both sides. During a major restoration conducted between 1875-78, some of the wing panels were cut in two, laterally, so that either side could be displayed simultaneously. [4]
A number of panels are in poor condition, from darkening of the colours over the centuries, accumulated dirt and poor decisions during restoration. At some point clothes were painted over the nude figures of the souls. These additions were removed during the 1870s restoration, but not without significant damage to the original paintwork. In general, the central inner panels are better preserved than the inner wings and the outer panels. [5]
Inner panels[edit]
Detail of Jesus Christ and the Archangel Michael in judgement. The blessed are to their right, the condemned to their left.
Nine inner panels are displayed in two registers when the work is fully opened. The large central panel spans both registers and shows Christ seated in Judgement, perched on a rainbow with his feet resting on a golden globe. He sits above the Archangel Michael who holds a scale and weighs souls. The far panel's to Christ's right show the entrance to heaven, those to his left the gates of Hell. The panels of the lower register form a continuous landscape, with figures moving from the central panel to their final destination after their judgement. This connection between the works is considered one of the greatest innovations of the work.
At the top of the centre panel Christ sits in judgement with a lily to his right and a sword to his left. He sits on a rainbow which extends to the two adjacent panels. His feet rest on a sphere. His left hand is lowered, his right raised in the act of blessing. The position of his hands in this way indicates the act of judgement as to whether a soul should pass to Heaven or Hell. [6] Christ's face is identical to the representation in van der Weyden's Braque Triptych completed just a few years later in 1452. [7]
Detail showing souls scurrying to hell.
Below Christ, the Archangel Michael wears a dispassionate expression as he holds a scale and weighs souls. He is depicted using the iconographic elements associated with paintings of the Last Judgment . At Michael's feet the dead rise from their graves. Some souls enter Paradise ; others, Hell. Paradise is depicted as a gate to a cathedral illuminated with shining light. The people walk calmly towards it clasping their hands in prayer, as an angel stands by the gate. Hell is depicted as a place of fiery gloom into which the damned tumble screaming and crying. The souls held in the scales are naked. The scale is tilted in the same direction as Christ's hands, with the one raised and one lowered, separating the condemned from the saved. [8] Reinforcing this, inscriptions around them read "
VIRTUTES
" (Virtues) and "
PECCATA
" (sins). Lorne Campbell notes that the inner panels evidence a very pessimistic view of humanity, with the damned far outnumbering the saved. [9]
At either side of the archangel Michael sit the Virgin Mary , John the Baptist and the twelve Apostles. Other panels depict various unidentified saints and various figures including a king, pope, monk and three women.
Detail
The two panels on the upper register show angels holding symbols of the passion, [2] including a lance, a crown of thorns, and a stick and sponge soaked in vinegar.
Exterior panels[edit]
The outer panels consist of two donor panels, two saints, and two showing the angel Gabriel presenting to Mary. The donors kneel in devotion before prayer books in the far wings, with four imitation statues in grisaille making up the rest of the panels, the lower two of which depict saints Sebastian and Anthony . Unusaually for an exterior of this kind, neither saint was a patron of the donors, rather they were included as traditionally they represent healing. Both were then associated with bubonic plague , and may have been intended potential intercessors for people with that or similar conditions. St Anthony, who became Beaube's dedicatory saint was also a protector for skin diseases and interestingly for ergotism . [10]
The two small paintings on the upper register show a rather traditional annunciation scene, with the usual dove near Mary. [4] Like many mid 1400s polyptychs, the exterior panels borrow heavily from Jan van Eyck 's Ghent Altarpiece , which was completed in 1432. The combination of naturalistic donor portraits with grisialle imitation statues of saints, is a direct reference, as is the rendering of the Annunciation to Mary in the same format. However van der Weyden was not inclined to merely imitate, and develops the format in the way he arranges the panels in such a concentrated and compact format. [11]
Patients of the Hotel-Dieu in their Beds. Nurses attend the dying in folio 77 from the Livre de vie active, unknown artist.
The donors can be identified by coats-of-arms held by angels in either panel. In addition, documents around the arrangement of the commission survive today. [4] Van Eyck has earlier portrayed Rolin in his Madonna of Chancellor Rolin , and he is recognisable from that work; both portraits show similar lips, a large chin and somewhat pointed ears. In van Eyck's portrait, Rolin is presented as perhaps pompous and arrogant, here – ten years later – he appears more thoughtful and concerned with humility. Rolin is shown in profile in both; Campbell wryly notes that may have been to disguise the sitter's ugliness and age, especially the shape of his mouth may have been downplayed. He writes that "Van Eyck impassively recorded; van der Weyden imposed a stylised and highly personal vision of the subject". Van Eyck's depiction was likely the most accurate; van der Weyden embellished, mainly by lengthening the nose, enlarging the eyes and providing more pleasing, raised eyebrows. [12]
De Salins' panel is in poor condition. Its colours have darkened with age; originally the niche was a light blue, today it is light green. The cloth draped behind her was scarlet rather than gold, and the shield held by the angel was also blue. [5]
Inscriptions[edit]
The panels contain several inscriptions of biblical text. They are applied in two ways, either as lettering seemingly swen into the edges of the clothes of the figures (which due to the folding of the cloths are mostly illegiable), or painted directly onto the surface of central inner panel. [13] The latter occur in four instance, with two pairs on either side of Christ, and two around Michael. Beneath the lily, light coloured Latin lettering records the words of God the Father: "
VENITE BENDICTI PATRIS MEI POSSIDETE PATATUM VOBIS REGUM A CONSTUTIONE MUNDI
" (Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of the world). The text beneath the sword is in black lettering and reads: "
DISCEDITE A ME MALEDICITI IN IGEM AERTERNUM QUO PARATUS EST DIABLO ET ANGELIS EIUS
" (Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels). [14] These letterings obey the 14th century convention of showing figures, imagery and motifs associated with the saved to Christ's right, and those of the banished to his left. The words beneath the lilly (the benedicti) begin at the foot of the inscription and read upwards, woith their curves leads intowards Christ. The text to his left (the maledicti) is opposite, beginning at the highest point and reading downwards. The inscriptions to his right are lightly coloured (to an extent that they are usually difficult to discern in reproduction), while the downwards words are applied with black paint. [15]
References[edit]
^ It was recently moved to shield it from light and better protect it from the up to 300,000 visitors it receives annually.
^ Both inscriptions quote from Jesus' discourse on The Sheep and the Goats ( Matthew 25 ).
^ Acres (2000), 87
Sources[edit]
Acres, Alfred. "Rogier van der Weyden's Painted Texts". Artibus et Historiae, Volume 21, No. 41, 2000. 75-109
Blum, Shirley Neilsen. Early Netherlandish Triptychs: A Study in Patronage. California Studies in the History of Art, 1969. ISBN 978-0-520-01444-2
Campbell, Lorne. Van der Weyden. London: Chaucer Press, 2004. ISBN 1-904449-24-7
Lane, Barbara. "'Requiem aeternam dona eis': The Beaune Last Judgment and the Mass of the Dead". Simiolus: Netherlands Quarterly for the History of Art, Volume 19, No. 3, 1989. 166-180
Upton, Joel Morgan. Petrus Christus: his place in Fifteenth-Century Flemish painting. Pennsylvania State University Press, 1989. ISBN 0-271-00672-2
v