JAN
MAR
APR
24
2015
2016
2017
16 captures
8 Jul 11 - 27 Apr 16
Close Help
Skip to main content
Home
About
Projects
Events
Resources
FAQs
Contact
Blog
donate
Search form
Search
The X-Change Files explores the intersections of science and entertainment, regularly taking a look at the ways in which science is portrayed in film and television.
Learn More
Receive Email Updates:
Stay Connected:
Blog
Event Recaps
Science News
Science in TV/Film
Archives
March 2016 (2)
February 2016 (1)
October 2015 (1)
September 2015 (1)
May 2015 (1)
April 2015 (1)
February 2015 (1)
August 2014 (1)
June 2014 (1)
April 2014 (1)
Pages
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
next ›
last »
Authors
Adam Spencer
David A. Kirby
Emilie Lorditch
Emilie Lorditch
Emilie Lorditch
Erica Lang
Hannah Kaplan
Hannah Kaplan
Helen Fisher
Janani Subramanian
Jenn Creighton
Jenna Busch
Jenna Busch
Jenna Busch
Katie Zucker
Kelly O'Malley
Kelly O'Malley
Kevin Grazier
Matt Aldag
Melissa Pollak
Patrick Carroll
Phil Plait
Ryan Hall
Sean Faulk
Sean Faulk
Sean Faulk
The Exchange
Todd Hornberger
Todd Hornberger
Umberto Cannella
Xavier Stiles
David A. Kirby
Lawrence Krauss
Matt Partney
Sidney Perkowitz
Jennifer Ouellette
Janet Zucker
Jerry Zucker
FRINGE SCIENCE
Get a behind-the-scenes look at The Exchange's consult for the hit series.
Read More
In Science We Trust: The CSI Effect & Forensic Science
Posted by The Exchange on 06/30/2011
Can watching forensic-focused TV shows like CSI affect how you act as a juror?
That is the question behind several studies on the so-called CSI Effect: jurors who watch CSI or other crime dramas are influenced by the shows’ exaggerated portrayal of forensic science and measure their experience (and decisions) as a juror against fictional Hollywood standards.
According to the CSI Effect theory, jurors now demand scientific evidence in criminal trials and without such evidence, are less likely to convict.
The CSI Effect Myth
But is it true?
Do popular televisions dramas like CSI and Bones warp ideas of forensic science?
According to Donald E. Shelton, the chief judge of Washtenaw County, Michigan, the short answer is “no.”
In 2010, Shelton published a study that interviewed more than 2,000 jurors regarding their television-watching habits and expectations of scientific evidence in criminal trials.
While the study did find a high expectation of scientific evidence (52% of jurors expected “some kind of scientific evidence” in every criminal case), the study did not find a link between watching CSI-type programs and being less likely to convict without scientific evidence.
“Like the unicorn and the mermaid,” the study reports, “the CSI Effect is a myth.”
So, it looks like CSI and other crime dramas are in the clear.
But without a television scapegoat, what is to blame for high expectations of scientific evidence in criminal trials?
“Blaming CSI or any television show is just too simplistic.
It’s much bigger than that,” Shelton said .
The high expectations, the study explains, can be attributed to broader changes in our culture as a whole.
For example, the availability and rapid advancement of technology creates a perception that forensic science technology is widely available to police departments, as well as highly accurate and advanced – a perception that simply is not true.
In Science We Trust
What might startle jurors is the lack of science in forensic science.
A 2009 report by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) concluded that, “The level of scientific development and evaluation varies substantially among forensic science disciplines.”
DNA analysis, for example, is highly accurate.
It also has a clear method for analysis and declaring a DNA match, which is backed by years of scientific research.
By comparison, microscopic hair analysis (without DNA) is highly unreliable with little scientific backing and no standards for declaring a match.
Because hair analysis without DNA is performed by comparing hair strands under a microscope, the categorization of hair features and declaration of a match is also dependent on the opinion of the examiner.
Even fingerprint analysis (expected in every criminal case by 47.3% of the jurors in Shelton’s study) is not reliable.
Fingerprints are analyzed by a method of visual examination and comparison, known as the ACE-V technique, which a 2006 study concluded did not have any scientific validity.
Fingerprint analysis is also subjective and biased.
Fingerprint examiners in the FBI investigation of the 2004 Madrid train bombing erroneously indentified Brandon Mayfield as a suspect.
It was later revealed that the examiners were influenced by the urgency of the investigation.
Other forensic science disciplines, such as shoeprint identification, fiber analysis, bite mark analysis, and bloodstain pattern analysis are judgment-based methods with little scientific backing.
Yet, jurors expect and trust the science behind these analyses.
CSI: Informing the Public
On television shows like CSI and Law & Order, forensic science is high-tech, sophisticated, and accurate – which is exactly how it should be portrayed for an hour-long drama.
How else can characters catch the bad guy?
Would you rather watch an hour of DNA analysis or fingerprint comparison?
We didn’t think so.
What is interesting is how the fictional world of crime drama, with all its sleek technology and instant test results, is encouraging viewers to learn more about forensic science, in some cases inspiring students to major in forensic science or other sciences.
Besides influencing viewers to pursue studies in forensic science, the television show has sparked a science exhibit called CSI: The Experience .
So, the show blamed for misinforming jurors is informing the public on the realities of forensic science.
This is not to suggest all crime dramas need to follow the same high-tech, high flash presentation of forensic science.
It is good to have realistic representations of the limitations of forensic science and, sometimes, crime dramas do let characters wrestle with the limits.
Forensic evidence is sometimes thrown out in television court drama, fictional investigators sometimes have to admit they made the wrong call; small steps but still appreciated.
And sometimes, admittedly, it is more interesting to watch what can go wrong than what can go right in forensic science.
Either way, people are watching and learning, which we call the “CSI Inspiration.”
Tags:
forensic science
CSI
Feature Article
Add new comment
Your name
Subject
Comment *
Tag Cloud
biology event recap Featured Article film physics science communication science consulting science fiction science of Sidney Perkowitz technology TV
More
Featured Items
Another Night of Total Destruction
Superheroes smashing into buildings won’t do enough damage.
An alien invasion probably won’t... Learn More
Packing Your Bags for Interstellar Travel
“The Earth is the cradle of the mind—but one cannot eternally live in a cradle.”
—Tsiolkovsky While... Learn More
Artificial Intelligence
A group of scientists and entertainers alike spent an evening at the SoHo House discussing the... Learn More
Do popular televisions dramas like CSI and Bones warp ideas of forensic science?
A 2009 report by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) concluded that, “The level of scientific development and evaluation varies substantially among forensic science disciplines.”
What is interesting is how the fictional world of crime drama, with all its sleek technology and instant test results, is encouraging viewers to learn more about forensic science.
Home
Contact Us
Sitemap
Terms of Use & Privacy Statement
©2016 National Academy of Sciences.
The Science and Entertainment Exchange is a nonprofit program of the National Academy of Sciences.
Website design by Gravitate Design Studio .