Chapter 4, "The Overthrow of Ngo Dinh Diem, May-November, 1963," pp.
201-276.
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1971)
Section 1, pp. 201-232
Summary and Analysis
The Diem coup was one of those critical events in the history of U.S. policy    that could have altered our commitment.
The choices were there: (1) continue    to plod along in a limited fashion with Diem--despite his and Nhu's growing    unpopularity; (2) encourage or tacitly support the overthrow of Diem, taking    the risk that the GVN might crumble and/or acommodate to the VC; and (3) grasp    the opportunity--with the obvious risks--of the political instability in South    Vietnam to disengage.
The first option was rejected because of the belief that    we could not win with Diem-Nhu.
The third was very seriously considered a policy    alternative because of the assumption that an independent, non-communist SVN    was too important a strategic interest to abandon-and because the situation    was not sufficiently drastic to call into question so basic an assumption.
The    second course was chosen mainly for the reasons the first was rejected-Vietnam    was thought too important; we wanted to win; and the rebellious generals seemed    to offer that prospect.
In making the choice to do nothing to prevent the coup and to tacitly support    it, the U.S. inadvertently deepened its involvement.
The inadvertence is the    key factor.
It was a situation without good alternatives.
While Diem's government    offered some semblance of stability and authority, its repressive actions against    the Buddhists had permanently alientated popular support, with a high probability    of victory for the Viet Cong.
As efficient as the military coup leaders appeared,    they were without a manageable base of political support.
When they came to    power and when the lid was taken off the Diem-Nhu reporting system, the GVN    position was revealed as weak and deteriorating.
And, by virtue of its interference    in internal Vietnamese affairs, the U.S. had assumed a significant responsibility    for the new regime, a responsibility which heightened our commitment and deepened    our involvement.
The catalytic event that precipitated the protracted crisis which ended in    the downfall of the Diem regime was a badly handled Buddhist religious protest    in Hue on May 8, 1963.
In and of itself the incident was hardly something to    shake the foundations of power of most modern rulers, but the manner in which    Diem responded to it, and the subsequent protests which it generated, was precisely    the one most likely to aggravate not alleviate the situation.
At stake, of course,    was far more than a religious issue.
The Buddhist protest had a profoundly political    character from the beginning.
It sprang and fed upon the feelings of political    frustration and repression Diem's autocratic rule had engendered.
The beginning of the end for Diem can, then, be traced through events to the    regime's violent suppression of a Buddhist protest demonstration in Hue on Buddha's    birthday, May 8, in which nine people were killed and another fourteen injured.
Although Buddhists had theretofore been wholly quiescent politically, in subsequent    weeks, a full-blown Buddhist "struggle" movement demonstrated a sophisticated    command of public protest techniques by a cohesive and disciplined organization,    somewhat belying the notion that the movement was an outraged, spontaneous response    to religious repression and discrimination.
Nonetheless, by June it was clear    that the regime was confronted not with a dissident religious minority, but    with a grave crisis of public confidence.
The Buddhist protest had become a    vehicle for mobilizing the widespread popular resentment of an arbitrary and    often oppressive rule.
It had become the focal point of political opposition    to Diem.
Under strong U.S. pressure and in the face of an outraged world opinion,    the regime reached ostensible agreement with the Buddhists on June 16.
But the    agreement merely papered over the crisis, without any serious concessions by    Diem.
This intransigence was reinforced by Diem's brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, and    his wife, who bitterly attacked the Buddhists throughout the summer.
By mid-August    the crisis was reaching a breaking point.
The Buddhists' demonstrations and protest created a crisis for American policy    as well.
The U.S. policy of support for South Vietnam's struggle against the    Hanoi-supported Viet Cong insurgency was founded on unequivocal support of Diem,    whom the U.S. had long regarded as the only national leader capable of unifying    his people for their internal war.
When the Buddhist protest revealed widespread    public disaffection, the U.S. made repeated attempts to persuade Diem to redress    the Buddhist grievances, to repair his public image, and to win back public    support.
But the Ngos were unwilling to bend.
Diem, in true mandarin style,    was preoccupied with questions of face and survival-not popular support.
He    did not understand the profound changes his country had experienced under stress,    nor did he understand the requirement for popular support that the new sense    of nationalism had created.
The U.S. Ambassador, Frederick Nolting, had conducted    a low-key diplomacy toward Diem, designed to bring him to the American way of    thinking through reason and persuasion.
He approached the regime during the    first weeks of the Buddhist crisis in the same manner, but got no results.
When    he left on vacation at the end of May, his DCM, William Truehart, abandoned    the soft sell for a tough line.
He took U.S. views to Diem not as expressions    of opinion, but as demands for action.
Diem, however, remained as obdurate and    evasive as ever.
Not even the U.S. threat to dissociate itself from GVN actions    in the Buddhist crisis brought movement.
In late June, with Nolting still on leave, President Kennedy announced the    appointment of Henry Cabot Lodge as Ambassador to Vietnam to replace Nolting    in September.
In the policy deliberations then taking place in Washington, consideration    was being given for the first time to what effect a coup against Diem would    have.
But Nolting returned, first to Washington and then to Saigon, to argue    that the only alternative to Diem was chaos.
The U.S. military too, convinced    that the war effort was going well, felt that nothing should be done to upset    the apple cart.
So Nolting was given another chance to talk Diem into conciliating    the Buddhists.
The Ambassador worked assiduously at the task through July and    the first part of August, but Diem would agree only to gestures and half-measures    that could not stop the grave deterioration of the political situation.
Nolting    left Vietnam permanently in mid-August with vague assurances from Diem that    he would seek to improve the climate of relations with the Buddhists.
Less than    a week later, Nolting was betrayed by Nhu's dramatic August 21 midnight raids    on Buddhist pagodas throughout Vietnam.
One of the important lessons of the American involvement in South Vietnam in    support of Diem was that a policy of unreserved commitment to a
particular leadership placed us in a weak and manipulable position on important    internal issues.
The view that there were "no alternatives" to Diem    greatly limited the extent of our influence over the regime and ruled out over    the years a number of kinds of leverage that we might usefully have employed    or threatened to employ.
Furthermore, it placed the U.S. in the unfortunate    role of suitor to a fickle lover.
Aware of our fundamental commitment to him,    Diem could with relative impunity ignore our wishes.
It reversed the real power    relationship between the two countries.
Coupled with Diem's persistent and ruthless    elimination of all potential political opposition, it left us with rather stark    alternatives indeed when a crisis on which we could not allow delay and equivocation    finally occurred.
For better or worse, the August 12 pagoda raids decided the    issue for us.
The raids, themselves, were carefully timed by Nhu to be carried out when the    U.S. was without an Ambassador, and only after a decree placing the country    under military martial law had been issued.
They were conducted by combat police    and special forces units taking orders directly from Nhu, not through the Army    chain of command.
The sweeping attacks resulted in the wounding of about 30    monks, the arrest of over 1,400 Buddhists and the closing of the pagodas (after    they had been damaged and looted in the raids).
In their brutality and their    blunt repudiation of Diem's solemn word to Nolting, they were a direct, impudent    slap in the face for the U.S. Nhu expected that in crushing the Buddhists he    could confront the new U.S. Ambassador with a fait accompli in which the U.S.    would complainingly acquiesce, as we had in so many of the regime's actions    which we opposed.
Moreover, he attempted to fix blame for the raids on the senior    Army generals.
Getting word of the attacks in Honolulu, where he was conferring    with Nolting and Hilsman, Lodge flew directly to Saigon.
He immediately let    it be known that the U.S. completely dissociated itself from the raids and could    not tolerate such behavior.
In Washington the morning after, while much confusion    reigned about who was responsible for the raids, a statement repudiating them    was promptly released.
Only after several days did the U.S. finally establish    Nhu's culpability in the attacks and publicly exonerate the Army.
On August 23, the first contact with a U.S. representative was made by generals    who had begun to plan a coup against Diem.
The generals wanted a clear indication    of where the U.S. stood.
State in its subsequently controversial reply, drafted    and cleared on a weekend when several of the principal Presidential advisors    were absent from Washington, affirmed that Nhu's continuation in a power position    within the regime was intolerable (words missing) and did not, "then, we    must face the possibility that Diem himself cannot be preserved."
This    message was to be communicated to the generals, and Diem was to be warned that    Nhu must go.
Lodge agreed with the approach to the generals, but felt it was    futile to present Diem with an ultimatum he would only ignore and one that might    tip off the palace to the coup plans.
Lodge proceeded to inform only the generals.
They were told that the U.S. could no longer support a regime which included    Nhu, but that keeping Diem was entirely up to them.
This was communicated to    the generals on August 27.
The President and some of his advisors, however,    had begun to have second thoughts abought switching horses so suddenly, and    with so little information on whether the coup could succeed, and if it did,    what kind of government it would bring to power.
As it turned out, Washington's    anxiety was for naught, the plot was premature, and after several uncertain    days, its demise was finally recognized on August 31.
Thus by the end of August, we found ourselves without a leadership to support    and without a policy to follow in our relations with the GVN.
In this context    a month-long policy review took place in Washington and in Vietnam.
It was fundamentally    a search for alternatives.
In both places the issue was joined between those    who saw no realistic alternatives to Diem and felt that his policies were having    only a marginal effect on the war effort, which they wanted to get on with by    renewing our support and communication with Diem; and those who felt that the    war against the VC would not possibly be won with Diem in power and preferred    therefore to push for a coup of some kind.
The first view was primarily supported    by the military and the CIA both in Saigon and in Washington, while the latter    was held by the U.S. Mission, the State Department and members of the White    House staff.
In the end, a third alternative was selected, namely to use pressure    on Diem to get him to remove Nhu from the scene and to end his repressive policies.
Through September, however, the debate continued with growing intensity.
Tactical    considerations, such as another Lodge approach to Diem about removing the Nhus    and the effect of Senator Church's resolution calling for an aid suspension,    focused the discussion at times, but the issue of whether to renew our support    for Diem remained.
The decision hinged on the assessment of how seriously the    political deterioration was affecting the war effort.
In the course of these policy debates, several participants pursued the logical    but painful conclusion that if the war could not be won with Diem, and if his    removal would lead to political chaos and also jeopardize the war effort, then    the war was probably unwinnable.
If that were the case, the argument went, then    the U.S. should really be facing a more basic decision on either an orderly    disengagement from an irretrievable situation, or a major escalation of the    U.S. involvement, including the use of U.S. combat troops.
These prophetic minority    voices were, however, raising an unpleasant prospect that the Administration    was unprepared to face at that time.
In hindsight, however, it is clear that    this was one of the times in the history of our Vietnam involvement when we    were making fundamental choices.
The option to disengage honorably at that time    now appears an attractively low-cost one.
But for the Kennedy Administration    then, the costs no doubt appeared much higher.
In any event, it proved to be    unwilling to accept the implications of predictions for a bleak future.
The    Administration hewed to the belief that if the U.S. be but willing to exercise    its power, it could ultimately always have its way in world affairs.
Nonetheless, in view of the widely divergent views of the principals in Saigon,    the Administration sought independent judgments with two successive fact-finding    missions.
The first of these whirlwind inspections, by General Victor Krulak,    JCS SACSA, and a State Department Vietnam expert, Joseph Mendenhall, from September    7-10, resulted in diametrically opposing reports to the President on the conditions    and situation and was, as a result, futile.
The Krulak-Mendenhall divergence    was significant because it typifies the deficient analysis of both the U.S.    civilian and military missions in Vietnam with respect to the overall political    situation in the country.
The U.S. civilian observers, for their part, failed    to fully appreciate the impact Diem had had in preventing the emergence of any    other political forces.
The Buddhists, while a cohesive and effective minority    protest movement, lacked a program or the means to achieve power.
The labor    unions were entirely urban-based and appealed to only a small segment of the    population.
The clandestine political parties were small, urban, and usually    elitist.
The religious sects had a narrow appeal and were based on ethnic minorities.
Only the Viet Cong had any real support and influence on a broad base in the    countryside.
The only real alternative source of political power was the Army    since it had a large, disciplined organization spanning the country, with an    independent communications and transportation system and a strong superiority    to any other group in coercive power.
In its reports on the Army, however, General    Harkins and the U.S. military had failed to appreciate the deeply corrosive    effect on internal allegiance and discipline in the Army that Diem's loyalty    based promotion and assignment policies had had.
They did not foresee that in    the wake of a coup senior officers would lack the cohesiveness to hang together    and that the temptations of power would promote a devisive internal competition    among ambitious men at the expense of the war against the Viet Cong.
Two weeks after the fruitless Krulak-Mendenhall mission, with the Washington    discussions still stalemated, it was the turn of Secretary McNamara and General    Taylor, the Chairman of the JCS, to assess the problem.
They left for Vietnam    on September 23 with the Presidential instruction to appraise the condition    of the war effort and the impact on it of the Buddhist political turmoil and    to recommend a course of action for the GVN and the U.S.
They returned to Washington    on October 2.
Their report was a somewhat contradictory compromise between the    views of the civilian and military staffs.
It affirmed that the war was being    won, and that it would be successfully concluded in the first three corps areas    by the end of 1964, and in the Delta by 1965, thereby permitting the withdrawal    of American advisors, although it noted that the political tensions were starting    to have an adverse effect on it.
But, more importantly, it recommended a series    of measures to coerce Diem into compliance with American wishes that included    a selective suspension of U.S. economic aid, an end to aid for the special forces    units used in the August 21 raids unless they were subordinated to the Joint    General Staff, and the continuation of Lodge's cool official aloofness from    the regime.
It recommended the public announcement of the U.S. intention to    withdraw 1,000 troops by the end of the year, but suggested that the aid suspensions    not be announced in order to give Diem a chance to respond without a public    loss of face.
It concluded by recommending against active U.S. encouragement    of a coup, in spite of the fact that an aid suspension was the one step the    generals had asked for in August as a sign of U.S. condemnation of Diem and    support for a change of government.
The report was quickly adopted by Kennedy    in the NSC and a brief, and subsequently much rued, statement was released to    the press on October 2, announcing the planned withdrawal of 1,000 troops by    year's end.
The McNamara-Taylor mission, like the Krulak-Mendenhall mission before and    the Honolulu Conference in November after the coup, points up the great difficulty    encountered by high level fact-finding missions and conferences in getting at    the "facts" of a complex policy problem like Vietnam in a short time.
It is hard to believe that hasty visits by harried high level officials with    overloaded itineraries really add much in the way of additional data or lucid    insight.
And because they become a focal point of worldwide press coverage,    they often raise public expectations or anxieties that may only create additional    problems for the President.
There were many such high level conferences over    Vietnam.
Of the recommendations of the McNamara-Taylor mission, the proposal for selective    suspension of economic aid, in particular the suspension of the commercial import    program, was the most significant both in terms of its effect, as an example    of the adroit use or denial of American assistance to achieve foreign policy    objectives.
In this instance economic sanctions, in the form selected aid suspensions    in those programs to which the regime would be most sensitive but that would    have no immediate adverse effect on the war effort, were used constructively    to influence events rather than negatively to punish those who had violated    our wishes, our usual reaction to coups in Latin America.
The proposal itself    had been under consideration since the abortive coup plot of August.
At that    time, Lodge had been authorized to suspend aid if he thought it would enhance    the likelihood of the success of a coup.
Later in September he was again given    specific control over the delay or suspension of any of the pending aid programs.
On both occasions, however, he had expressed doubt about the utility of such    a step.
In fact, renewal of the commercial import program had been pending since    early in September, so that the adoption of the McNamara-Taylor proposal merely    formalized the existing situation into policy.
As might have been expected (although    the record leaves ambiguous whether this was a conscious aim of the Administration),    the Vietnamese generals interpreted the suspension as a green light to proceed    with a coup.
While this policy was being applied in October, Lodge shunned all contact with    the regime that did not come at Diem's initiative.
He wanted it clearly understood    that they must come to him prepared to adopt our advice before he would recommend    to Washington a change in U.S. policy.
Lodge performed with great skill, but    inevitably frictions developed within the Mission as different viewpoints and    proposals came forward.
In particular, Lodge's disagreements and disputes with    General Harkins during October when the coup plot was maturing and later were    to be of considerable embarrassment to Washington when they leaked to the press.
Lodge had carefully cultivated the press, and when the stories of friction appeared,    it was invariably Harkins or Richardson or someone else who was the villian.
No sooner had the McNamara-Taylor mission returned to Washington and reported    its recommendations than the generals reopened contact with the Mission indicating    that once again they were preparing to strike against the regime.
Washington's    immediate reaction on October 5 was to reiterate the decision of the NSC on    the McNamara-Taylor report, i.e., no U.S. encouragement of a coup.
Lodge was    instructed, however, to maintain contact with the generals and to monitor their    plans as they emerged.
These periodic contacts continued and by October 25,    Lodge had come to believe that Diem was unlikely to respond to our pressure    and that we should therefore not thwart the coup forces.
Harkins disagreed,    believing that we still had not given Diem a real chance to rid himself of Nhu    and that we should present him with such an ultimatum and test his response    before going ahead with a coup.
He, furthermore, had reservations about the    strength of the coup forces when compared with those likely to remain loyal    to the regime.
All this left Washington anxious and doubtful.
Lodge was cautioned    to seek fuller information on the coup plot, including a line-up of forces and    the proposed plan of action.
The U.S. could not base its policy on support for    a coup attempt that did not offer a strong prospect of success.
Lodge was counseled    to consider ways of delaying or preventing the coup if he doubted its prospects    for success.
By this juncture, however, Lodge felt committed and, furthermore,    felt the matter was no longer in our hands.
The generals were taking the action    on their own initiative and we could only prevent it now by denouncing them    to Diem.
While this debate was still going on, the generals struck.
Shortly after Ambassador Lodge and Admiral Felt had called on Diem on November    1, the generals made their move, culminating a summer and fall of complex intrigue.
The coup was led by General Minh, the most respected of the senior generals,    together with Generals Don, Kim and Khiem.
They convoked a meeting of all but    a few senior officers at JGS headquarters at noon on the day of the coup, announced    their plans and got the support of their compatriots.
The coup itself was executed    with skill and swiftness.
They had devoted special attention to ensuring that    the major potentially loyal forces were isolated and their leaders neutralized    at the outset of the operation.
By the late afternoon of November 1, only the    palace guard remained to defend the two brothers.
At 4:30 p.m., Diem called    Lodge to ask where the U.S. stood.
Lodge was noncommital and confined himself    to concern for Diem's physical safety.
The conversation ended inconclusively.
The generals made repeated calls to the palace offering the brothers safe conduct    out of the country if they surrendered, but the two held out hope until the    very end.
Sometime that evening they secretly slipped out of the palace through    an underground escape passage and went to a hide-away in Cholon.
There they    were captured the following morning after their whereabouts was learned when    the palace fell.
Shortly the two brothers were murdered in the back of an armored    personnel carrier en route to JGS headquarters.
Having successfully carried off their coup, the generals began to make arrangements    for a civilian government.
Vice President Tho was named to head a largely civilian    cabinet, but General Minh became President and Chairman of the shadow Military    Revolutionary Council.
After having delayed an appropriate period, the U.S.    recognized the new government on November 8.
As the euphoria of the first days    of liberation from the heavy hand of the Diem regime wore off, however, the    real gravity of the economic situation and the lack of expertise in the new    government became apparent to both Vietnamese and American officials.
The deterioration    of the military situation and the strategic hamlet program also came more and    more clearly into perspective.
These topics dominated the discussions at the Honolulu Conference on November    20 when Lodge and the country team met with Rusk, McNamara, Taylor, Bell, and    Bundy.
But the meeting ended inconclusively.
After Lodge had conferred with    the President a few days later in Washington, the White House tried to pull    together some conclusions and offer some guidance for our continuing and now    deeper involvement in Vietnam.
The instructions contained in NSAM 273, however,    did not reflect the truly dire situation as it was to come to light in succeeding    weeks.
The reappraisals forced by the new information would swiftly make it    irrelevant as it was "overtaken by events."
For the military coup d'etat against Ngo Dinh Diem, the U.S. must accept its    full share of responsibility.
Beginning in August of 1963 we variously authorized,    sanctioned and encouraged the coup efforts of the Vietnamese generals and offered    full support for a successor government.
In October we cut off aid to Diem in    a direct rebuff, giving a green light to the generals.
We maintained clandestine    contact with them throughout the planning and execution of the coup and sought    to review their operational plans and proposed new government.
Thus, as the    nine-year rule of Diem came to a bloody end, our complicity in his overthrow    heightened our responsibilities and our commitment in an essentially leaderless    Vietnam.
End of Summary and Analysis
CHRONOLOGY
8 May 1963 Hue incident
Government troops fire on a Buddhist protest demonstration, killing nine      and wounding fourteen.
The incident triggers a nationwide Buddhisst protest      and a crisis of popular confidence for the Diem regime.
GVN maintains the      incident was an act of VC terrorism.
10 May 1963 Manifesto of Buddhist clergy
A five point demand by the Buddhist clergy is transmitted to the Government.
It calls for freedom to fly the Buddhist flag, legal qaulity with the Catholic      Church, an end of arrests, punishment of the perpetrators of the May 8 incident,      and indemnification of its victims.
18 May 1963 Nolting meeting with Diem: Embassy Saigon message 1038
U.S. Ambassador Nolting meets with Diem and outlines the steps the U.S. wants      Diem to take to refress the Buddhist grievances and recapture public confidence.
These include an admission of responsibility for the Hue incident, compensation      of the victims, and a reaffirmation of religious equality and non-discrimination.
30 May 1963 Buddhist demonstrations
350 Buddhist monks demonstrate in front of the National Assmebly and announce      a 48-hour hunger strike.
4 Jun 1963 Truehart meeting with Thuan
With Nolting on leave, charge d'affaires Truehart meets with Secretary of      State Tuan and on insruction from the State Department, warns that U.S. support      for the GVN could not be maintained if there were another bloody suppression      of Buddhists.
4 Jun 1963 Tho Committee appointed
Later that day the Government announces the appointment of an inter-ministerial      committee headed by Vice President Tho to resolve the religious issue.
5 Jun 1963 The committee meets Buddhists
The first meeting between the Tho committee and the Buddhist leadership takes      place, after which each side publicly questions the other's good faith in      the negotiations.
8 Jun 1963 Madame Nhu atacks Buddhists
Madame Nhu, wife of Diem's powerful brother, publicly accuses the Buddhists      of being infiltrated with communist agents
Later on the same day, Truehart protests Mme. Nhu's remarks to Diem and threatens      to dissociate the U.S. from any future repressive measures against the Buddhists.
11 Jun 1963 First Buddhist suicide by fire
At noon in the middle of a downtown intersection, a Buddhist monk, Thich      Quang Duc, is immersed in gasoline and sets himself afire.
His fiery protest      is photographed and is front page material in the world's newspapers.
Shock      and indignation are universal.
Mme. Nhu subsequently refers to it as a "barbecue."
12 Jun 1963 Truehart repeats U.S. dissociation threat
Truehart sees Diem again to protest his lack of action on the Buddhist problem      and says that Quang Duc's suicide has shocked the world.
If Diem does not      act, the U.S. will be forced to dissociate itself from him.
14 Jun 1963 Tho committee meets again with Buddhists
Under U.S. pressure, negotiations between Vice President Tho's committee      and the Buddhist leadership reopen in apparent earnest.
16 Jun 1963 GVN-Buddhist communique
A joint GVN-Buddhist communique is released as a product of the negotiations      that outlines the elements of a settlement, but affixes no responsibility      for the May 8 Hue incident.
Late June- July Buddhist protest intensifies
Buddhists protest activities intensify as leadership passes from the discredited      moderate, older leaders to younger militants.
The Saigon press corps is actively      cultivated.
27 June 1963 Kennedy announces Lodge appointment
President Kennedy, visiting in Ireland, announces the appointment of Henry      Cabot Lodge as the new U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam, effective in September.
3 Jul 1963 Tho committee absolves regime
Vice President Tho's committee announces that a preliminary investigation      of the May 8 incident has confirmed that the deaths were the result of an      act of VC terrorism.
4 Jul 1963 White House meeting on Vietnamese situation
At a State Department briefing for the President it is generally agreed that      Diem will not voluntarily remove Nhu.
A discussion of the likely consequences      of a coup reveals divergent views.
5 Jul 1963 Nolting in Washington
Having cut short his vacation to return to Washington for consultations,      Nolting confers with Under Secretary of State George Ball and voices the fear      that an attempt to overthrow Diem would result in a protracted religious civil      war that would open the door to the Viet Cong.
We should not abandon Diem      yet.
While in Washington he also sees Secretary McNamara.
10 Jul 1963 SNIE 53-2-63
This special intelligence estimate notes coup rumors in Vietnam and warns      that a coup would disrupt the war effort and perhaps give the Viet Cong the      opportunity for gains they had been hoping for.
It concludes, however, that      if Diem does nothing to implement the June 16 agreements, Buddhist unrest      will continue through the summer and increase the likelihood of a coup attempt.
11 Jul 1963 Nolting's return to Saigon
Nolting returns to Vietnam with Washington's blessing to make one last attempt      to persuade Diem to conciliate the Buddhists.
The hope is to draw on the good      will that Nolting has built up in his two years of service.
11 Jul 1963 Nhu squelches coup plotting
At a special meeting for all senior generals, Nhu attacks their loyalty to      the regime for not having thwarted the numerous coup plots that had been reported.
The meeting apparently forestalls any immediae threat to the family.
15 Jul 1963 Embassy Saigon message 85
Deeply resentful of Truehart's tough pressure tactics, Nolting meets with      Diem and attempts to mollify him.
He convinces Diem to make a nationwide radio      address with concessions to the Buddhists.
19 Jul 1963 Diem speaks on radio
Complying with the letter but not the spirit of Nolting's request, Diem delivers      a brief cold radio address that makes only very minor concessions to the Buddhists      and asks for harmony and support of the Government.
McNamara press conference
At a press conference, Secretary McNamara says the war is progressing well      and the Buddhist crisis has not yet affected it.
5 Aug 1963 Second Buddhist suicide
A second Buddhist monk commits suicide by burning himself to death in the      continuing protest against the Diem regime.
14 Aug 1963 Nolting-Diem meeting
In their final meeting before Nolting's departure from Vietnam, Diem promises      to make a public statement repudiating Mme Nhu's inflammatory denunciations      of the Buddhists.
Nolting left the next day.
15 Aug 1963 New York Herald Tribune article by Marguerite Higgins
Diem's promised public statement takes the form of an interview with Marguerite      Higgins, conservative correspondent of the New York Herald Tribune.
Diem asserts      that conciliation has been his policy toward the Buddhists all along and the      family is pleased with Lodge's appointment.
18 Aug 1963 Generals decide on martial law
Ten senior Army generals meet and decide that in view of the deteriorating      political situation, they will ask Diem for a declaration of martial law to      permit them to return monks from outside Saigon to their own provinces and      pagodas and thus reduce tensions in the capital.
20 Aug 1963 Generals propose martial law to Nhu and Diem
A small group of generals meets first with Nhu and then with Diem to propose      that martial law be decreed forthwith.
Diem approves the proposal and the      decree takes effect at midnight.
21 Aug 1963 Nhu's forces attack pagodas
Under the cover of the military martial law, shortly after midnight, forces      loyal to Nhu and under his orders attack pagodas throughout Vietnam, arresting monks and sacking the sacred buildings.
Over 30 Buddhists are injured and      over 1400 arrested.
The attack is a shattering repudiation of Diem's promises      to Nolting.
The Embassy is taken by surprise.
Lodge confers with Nolting and Hilsman
First news of the attacks reaches Lodge in Honolulu where he is conferring      with Nolting and Assistant Secretary of State Hilsman.
He is dispatched immediately      to Vietnam.
Washington reaction
At 9:30 a.m. a stiff statement is released by State deploring the raids as      a direct violation of Diem's assurances to the U.S.
But first intelligence      places the blame for them on the Army, not Nhu.
22 Aug 1963 Lodge arrives in Saigon
After a brief stop in Tokyo, Lodge arrives in Saigon at 9:30 p.m.
The situation      still remains confused.
23 Aug 1963 CIA information Report TDCS DB-3/656,252
General Don, armed forces commander under the martial law decree, has contacted      a CAS officer and asked why the U.S. was broadcasting the erroneous story      that the Army had conducted the pagoda raids.
Nhu's special forces were responsible.
The U.S. should make its position known.
A separate contact by another general      with a member of the mission had brought another inquiry as to the U.S. position.
The query is clear.
Would we support the Army if it acted against Nhu and/or      Diem?
Student demonstrations
Large student protest demonstrations on behalf of the imprisoned Buddhists      take place at the faculties of medicine and pharmacy at the University of      Saigon.
They are a dramatic break with the tradition of student apathy to      politics in Vietnam.
The regime reacts with massive arrests.
24 Aug 1963 Embassy Saigon message 316, Lodge to Hilsman
Lodge lays the blame for the raids at Nhu's feet and states that his influence      is significantly increased.
But, in view of the loyalty of Saigon area commanders,      a coup attempt would be a "shot in the dark."
State message 243, State to Lodge
Subsequently known as the "Aug 24 cable," this controversial message      acknowledges Nhu's responsibility for the raids and says that U.S. can no      longer tolerate his continuation in power.
If Diem is unable or unwilling      to remove him, the generals are to be told that the U.S. will be prepared      to discontinue economic and military support, accept the obvious implication      and will promise assistance to them in any period of interim breakdown of      the GVN.
Lodge's permission is requested for a VOA broadcast exonerating the      Army of responsibility for the Aug 21 raids.
25 Aug 1963 Embassy Saigon message
Lodge approves the proposed course of action but sees no reason to approach      Diem first.
Diem will not remove the Nhus and it would merely tip off the      palace to the impending military action.
CAS Saigon message 0292
Lodge, Harkins, and Richardson meet and agree on an approach to the generals      with the information in State's 243.
26 Aug 1963 VOA broadcast
Early on this Monday morning, VOA in South Vietnam broadcasts the press stories      placing blame for the Aug 21 raids on Nhu and absolving the Army.
It also      broadcast press speculation that the U.S. is contemplating an aid suspension.
Lodge presents credentials to Diem
Later the same morning, Lodge presents his credentials to Diem, after an      early morning meeting with Harkins and Richardson, at which they agree on      the details of the approach to the generals.
NSC meeting
The Aug 24 cable of instructions had been drafted, cleared and sent on a      weekend with McNamara, McCone, Rusk and the President all out of town.
The      NSC meeting on Monday morning reveals that these top advisors have reservations      about proceeding hastily with a coup when we lack so much basic information      about its leadership and chances.
Lodge is asked for more details.
27 Aug 1963 CAS agents meet generals
CAS agents Conein and Spera meet with Generals Khiem and Khanh respectively.
Khiem tells Conein that other participants are Generals Minh, Kim, Thieu and      Le, and that General Don was aware of the plot and approved, but was too exposed      to participate.
Embassy Saigon message 364
Lodge gives an optimistic appraisal of the balance of forces for a coup and      expresses confidence in the identified leaders.
NSC meeting
At the now daily NSC meeting in Washington, the State Department participants      generally favor going ahead with the coup, while the Defense Department, both      civilian and military, prefers another try with Diem.
28 Aug 1963 MACV message 1557
Harkins goes on record with doubts about the line-up of forces for the coup      and sees no reason for our "rush approval."
State message 269, President to Lodge; and JCS message 3385, Taylor to      Harkins
Concerned by the differing views of Lodge and Harkins, as well as the division      of opinion in Washington, the President asks the Ambassador and MACV for their      separate appraisals.
29 Aug 1963 CAS agents meet Minh
At this meeting, arranged by Minh, he asks for clear evidence that the U.S.      will not betray them to Nhu.
He is unwilling to discuss the details of his      plan.
When asked what would constitute a sign of U.S. support, he replies      that the U.S. should suspend economic aid to the regime.
Embassy Saigon message 375
Lodge replies to the Presidential query that the U.S. is irrevocably committed      to the generals.
He recommends showing the CAS messages to them to establish      our good faith and if that is insufficient, he recommends a suspension of      economic aid as they requested.
MACV message 1566
Harkins reply to Taylor suggests that one last effort be made with Diem in      the form of an ultimatum demanding Nhu's removal.
Such a move he feels will      strengthen the hand of the generals, not imperil them.
NSC meeting
Another inconclusive meeting is held with the division of opinion on a U.S.      course of action still strong.
The result is to leave policy making in Lodge's      hands.
State message 272
Lodge is authorized to have Harkins show the CAS messages to the generals      in exchange for a look at their detailed plans.
He is further authorized to      suspend U.S. aid at his discretion.
31 Aug 1963 MACV message 1583; Embassy Saigon message 391; and CAS Saigon    message 0499
Harkins meets with Khiem who tells him that Minh has called off the coup.
Military was unable to achieve a favorable balance of forces in the Saigon      area and doubts about whether the U.S. had leaked their plans to Nhu were      the deciding factors.
A future attempt is not ruled out.
NSC meeting; MGen Victor C. Krulak, Memo for the Record, Vietnam Meeting      at the State Dept.
With the demise of the coup plot confirmed, the NSC (without the President)      meets to try to chart a new policy for Vietnam.
The discussion reveals the      divergence between the military desire to get on with the war and repair relations      with Diem, and the State Department view that continued support for Diem will      eventually mean a loss of the war as more and more of the South Vietnamese      are alienated from it.
No decisions are taken.
2 Sep 1963 Kennedy TV interview
The President, in a TV interview with CBS News' Walter Cronkite, expresses      his disappointment with Diem's handling of the Buddhist crisis and concern      that a greater effort is needed by the GVN to win popular support.
This can      be done, he feels, "with change in policy and perhaps with personnel      . . ."
Lodge meets with Nhu
Avoiding any contact with Diem, Lodge nonetheless meets with Nhu who announces      his intention to quit the Government as a sign of the progress of the campaign      against the VC.
Mme Nhu and Archbishop Thuc, another of Diem's brothers, are      to leave the country on extended trips shortly.
6 Sep 1963 NSC meeting
The NSC decides to instruct Lodge to reopen "tough" negotiations      with Diem and to start by clarifying to him the U.S. position.
Robert Kennedy      speculates that if the war can be won neither with Diem nor in the event of      a disruptive coup, we should perhaps be considering a U.S. disengagement.
Secretary McNamara proposes a fact-finding trip by General Krulak, and State      suggests including Joseph Mendenhall, a senior FSO with Vietnam experience.
They leave later the same day.
7 Sep 1963 Archbishop Thuc leaves Vietnam
With the intercession of the Vatican and the Papal Delegate in Saigon, Archbishop      Thuc leaves the country for Rome on an extended visit.
8 Sep 1963 AID Director Bell TV interview
In a televised interview, AID Director Bell expresses concern that Congress      might cut aid to South Vietnam if the Diem Government does not change its      repressive policies.
9 Sep 1963 Mme Nhu leaves Vietnam
Mme Nhu departs from Saigon to attend the World Parliamentarians Conference      in Belgrade and then to take an extendedtrip through Europe and possibly the      U.S.
Kennedy TV interview
Appearing on the inaugural program of the NBC Huntley-Brinkley News, the      President says he does not believe an aid cut-off would be helpful in achieving      American purposes in Vietnam at present.
10 Sep 1963 NSC meeting
Krulak and Mendenhall return from Vietnam after a whirlwind four day trip      and make their report to the NSC.
With them are John Mecklin, USIS Director      in Saigon, and Rufus Phillips, USOM's Director of Rural Programs.
Krulak's      report stresses that the war is being won and, while there is some dissatisfaction      in the military with Diem, no one would risk his neck to remove him.
A continuation      of present policies under Diem will yield victory.
Mendenhall presents a completely      contradictory view of the situation.
A breakdown of civil administration was      possible and a religious civil war could not be excluded if Diem was not replaced.
The war certainly could not be won with Diem.
Phillips and Mecklin support      Mendenhall with variations.
Nolting agrees with Krulak.
All the disagreement      prompts the President to ask the two emissaries, "You two did visit the      same country, didn't you?"
11 Sep 1963 Embassy Saigon message 478
Lodge reverses himself in suggesting a complete study of kinds of economic      aid suspension that might be used to topple the regime.
White House meeting
White House decides to hold economic aid renewal in abeyance pending a complete      examination of how it might be used to pressure Diem.
tion in the Senate condemning the South Vietnamese Government for its repressive      handling of the Buddhist problem and calling for an end to U.S. aid unless      the repressions are abandoned.
12 Sep 1963 Senator Church's Resolution
With White House approval, Senator Church introduces a resolution in the      Senate condemning the South Vietnamese Government for its repressive handling      of the Buddhist problem and calling for an end to U.S. aid unless the repressions      are abandoned.
14 Sep 1963 State message 411
Lodge is informed that approval of the $18.5 million commercial import program      is deferred until basic policy decisions on Vietnam have been made.
16 Sep 1963 Martial law ends
Martial law is ended throughout the country.
17 Sep 1963 NSC meeting
Two alternative proposals for dealing with Diem are considered.
The first      would use an escalatory set of pressures to get him to do our bidding.
The      second would involve acquiescence in recent GVN actions, recognition that      Diem and Nhu are inseparable, and an attempt to salvage as much as possible      from a bad situation.
A decision is taken to adopt the first as policy, and      also to send Secretary McNamara and General Taylor on a fact-gathering mission.
21 Sep 1963 White House press release
The forthcoming McNamara-Taylor mission is announced to the press by the      White House.
White House instructions to McNamara-Taylor
The White House instructions for the mission ask the two men to (1) appraise      the status of the military effort; (2) assess the impact on the war effort      of the Buddhist crisis; (3) recommend a course of action for the GVN to redress      the problem and for the US.
to get them to do it; and (4) examine how our      aid can further no. 3.
23 Sep 1963 McNamara-Taylor mission departs
The McNamara-Taylor party leaves Washington for its ten day trip to Vietnam.
25 Sep 1963 Opening meeting of McNamara-Taylor with country team
The disagreement between Harkins and Lodge about the situation in-country      and the progress of the war surfaces immediately in this first conference.
McNamara spends several subsequent days touring various parts of Vietnam to      appraise the war first hand and talk with U.S. and Vietnamese officers.
27 Sep 1963 National Assembly elections
As announced earlier, and at the end of a pro forma one week campaign, the      GVN holds nation-wide elections for the National Assembly with predictably      high turnouts and majorities for Government candidates.
Embassy Saigon messages 602 and 608
Aware that McNamara and Taylor are tasked to recommend uses of the aid program      to pressure Diem, both Lodge and Brent, the USOM Director, go on record against      them.
29 Sep 1963 McNamara, Taylor and Lodge see Diem
In their protocol call on Diem, and after his two-hour monologue, McNamara      is able to pointedly stress that the political unrest and Government repressive      measures against the Buddhists were undermining the U.S. war effort.
Diem      seems unimpressed, but does ask Taylor for his appraisal, as a military man,      of the progress of the war.
30 Sep 1963 McNamara, Taylor and Lodge meet Vice President Tho
Tho stresses to the two visitors the gravity of the political deterioration      and the negative effect it was having on war.
He questions the success of      the strategic hamlet program.
Later that day, the McNamara-Taylor party leaves      South Vietnam for Honolulu.
2 Oct 1963 SecDef Memo for the President: Report of the McNamara-Taylor    mission
After a day in Honolulu to prepare a report, McNamara and Taylor return to      Washington and present their findings and recommendations to a morning NSC      meeting.
Their long report represents a compromise between the military and      the civilian views.
It confirms the progress of the war, but warns of the dangers inherent in the current political turmoil and recommends pressures      against Diem to bring changes.
Militarily, it calls for greater GVN effort,      especially in the Delta and in clear and hold operations, and a consolidation      of the strategic hamlet program.
It proposes the announcement of the plans      to withdraw 1,000 American troops by year's end.
To put political pressure      on Diem to institute the reforms we want, it recommends a selective aid suspension,      an end of support for the special forces responsible for the pagoda raids,      and a continuation of Lodge's aloofness from the regime.
It recommends against      a coup, but qualifies this by suggesting that an alternative leadership be      identified and cultivated.
The recommendations are promptly approved by the      President.
White House press release
A statement following the meeting is released as recommended by McNamara      and Taylor that reiterates the U.S. commitment to the struggle against the      VC, announces the 1,000 man troop withdrawal, and dissociates the U.S. from      Diem's repressive policies.
It does not, however, announce the aid suspensions.
CAS Saigon message 1385
CAS agent Conein "accidentally" meets General Don at Tan Son Nhut.
Don asks him to come to Nha Trang that evening.
With Embassy approval Conein      keeps the appointment.
Don states that there is an active plot among the generals      for a coup, and that General Minh wants to see Conein on Oct 5 to discuss      details.
The key to the plan, according to Don, is the conversion of III Corps      Commander, General Dinh.
5 Oct 1963 NSC meeting
The President approves detailed recommendations of the McNamara-Taylor mission      for transmission to Lodge.
CAP message 63560
President today approved recommendation that no initiative should now be      taken to give any active covert encouragement to a coup.
There should, however,      be urgent covert effort . . . to identify and build contacts with possible      alternative leadership as and when it appears."
CAS Saigon message 1445
With Lodge's approval, and probably before receipt of foregoing message,      Conein meets with General Minh.
Minh says he must know the U.S. position on      a coup in the near future.
The GVN's loss of popular support is endangering      the whole war effort.
Three possible plans are mentioned, one involving assassination.
Conein is noncommital.
CAS Saigon message 34026
Lodge recommends that when Conein is contacted again, he be authorized to      say that the U.S. will not thwart a coup, that we are willing to review plans,      and that we will continue support to a successor regime.
Richardson recalled
His identity having been compromised in recent press stories about internal      policy struggles in the U.S. mission, CIA Chief of Station, John Richardson,      is recalled to Washington.
6 Oct 1963 CAP message 63560
Washington clarifies its views on a coup by stating that the U.S. will not      thwart such a move if it offers prospects of a more effective fight against      the VC.
Security and deniability of all contacts is paramount.
7 Oct 1963 National Assembly convenes
The newly elected National Assembly convenes to hear Diem's State of the      Union address.
Diem speaks mainly of Vietnam's past progress under his rule,      playing down the current political crisis and making only scant reference      to U.S. aid.
Mme Nhu arrives in U.S.
Mme Nhu arrives in the U.S. from Europe for a three-week speaking tour.
She      immediately launches into vituperative attacks on the U.S. and its role in      Vietnam.
Oct 1963 UN General Assembly vote
The UN General Assembly, after a strong debate with many voices denouncing      Diem's anti-Buddhist policy, votes to send a fact-finding team to Saigon to      investigate the charges of repression.
Oct 1963 CAS officer meets Minh
A CAS officer reportedly meets with Minh and conveys the U.S. position that      it will neither encourage nor thwart a coup attempt, but would hope to be      informed about it.
17 Oct 1963 GVN informed of aid cut-off to special forces
Acting for the Ambassador, General Stillwell, MACV J-3, informs Secretary      Thuan that U.S. aid for the special forces units responsible for the Aug 21      raids is being suspended until they are transferred to the field and placed      under JGS command.
22 Oct 1963 Department of State, JNR Research Memo RFE9O
The State Department publishes a controversial research memorandum which      takes issue with the Pentagon's optimistic reading of the statistical indicators      on the progress of the war.
The memo states that certain definitely negative      and ominous trends can be identified.
Harkins sees Don
General Harkins sees General Don, and in a conversation whose interpretation      is subsequently disputed, tells him that U.S. officers should not be approached      about a coup as it distracts them from their job, fighting the VC.
Don takes      it as U.S. discouragement
of a coup.
23 Oct 1963 CAS agent meets Don
General Don renews contact with Conein to ask for clarification of U.S. policy      after Harkins' statement to him of the previous day.
Conein repeats Washington      guidance, which relieves Don.
Conein asks for proof of the existence of the      coup and its plan; Don promises to provide politi
[material missing]
24 Oct 1963 Diem invites Lodge to Dalat
Diem extends an invitation to Lodge and his wife to spend Sunday, Oct 27,      with him at his villa in Dalat.
Lodge is pleased, Diem has come to him.
1st CAS agent meeting with Don
Conein meets with Don in the morning and the latter reports that Harkins      had corrected his previous remarks and apologized for any misunderstanding.
The coup is set to take place before Nov 2 and he will meet Conein later that      day to review the plans.
2nd CAS agent meeting with Don
In the evening, Don tells Conein that the coup committee voted not to reveal      any plans because of concern about security leaks.
He promises to turn over      to Conein for Lodge's Eyes Only the operation plan two days before the coup      occurs.
UN fact-finding team arrives in Saigon
The UN fact-finding team arrives in Saigon and begins its investigation.
25 Oct 1963 CAS Saigon message 1964
Lodge argues that the time has come to go ahead with a coup and we should      not thwart the maturing plot.
He takes strong exception to Harkins reservations      about the determination and ability of the plotters to carry off the coup.
CAP message 63590
Bundy, replying for the White House, is concerned about the dangers of U.S.      support for a coup that fails.
We must be in a position to judge the prospects      for the coup plan and discourage any effort with likelihood of failure.
26 Oct 1963 Vietnamese National Day
Diem reviews the troops in the National Day parade before scant crowds with      Lodge and all other diplomatic personnel in attendance.
The coup had originally      been scheduled for this day.
27 Oct 1963 Lodge-Diem meeting
As planned, Lodge travels to Dalat with Diem and engages in a day-long conversation      that produces little results.
Diem makes his standard complaints against the      U.S., and whenever Lodge asks what he is planning to do about specific U.S.      requests, he changes the subject.
At one point, he does inquire, however,      about resumption of the commercial import program.
Lodge asks what movement      he will make on our requests.
Diem changes the subject.
Lodge's feelings of      frustration confirm his conviction that we cannot work with Diem.
Buddhist suicide
A seventh Buddhist monk commits suicide by fire.
28 Oct 1963 Don contacts Lodge
At the airport in the morning prior to departing for the dedication of an      atomic energy facility in Dalat, General Don approaches Lodge and asks if      Conein is authorized to speak for the U.S. Lodge says yes.
Don then affirms      the need for the coup to be completely Vietnamese.
Lodge agrees, but when      he asks about timing, Don replies that the generals are not yet ready.
CAS agent meets Don
That evening Conein meets Don again and the latter says that the plans may      be available for Lodge only four hours before the coup.
Lodge should not change      his plans to go to Washington on Oct 31 as this would tip off the palace.
Some details of the organization of the coup committee are discussed.
29 Oct 1963 CJNCPAC alerts task force
CINCPAC alerts a naval and air task force to stand off Vietnam for possible      evacuation of American dependents and civilians if required.
NSC meeting
A decision is made at the NSC meeting to have Lodge fully inform Harkins      on the coup plotting and arrangements, since if Lodge leaves, Harkins will      be in charge.
Concern is also registered at the differing views of the two      men toward a coup.
Special forces transferred from Saigon
In the first preparatory act of the coup, General Dinh orders Colonel Tung's      special forces out of Saigon for maneuvers.
It is unclear whether the action      came as a part of the generals' coup or Nhu's psuedo coup.
30 Oct 1963 MACV messages 2028, 2033, and 2034
Belatedly apprised of the continuing contacts with the generals and the U.S.      role in the coup plotting, General Harkins dispatches three angry cables to      Taylor in which he disagrees with Lodge's interpretation of the U.S. policy.
He understands it to be no active covert encouragement.
He opposes personally      a coup and doesn't think the generals have the forces to pull one off.
CAS Washington message 79109
The White House is now genuinely concerned at the Saigon dispute and tells      Lodge it believes we still have the power to call off the coup if we choose      to.
CAS Saigon message 2063
Lodge replies to Washington that he is powerless to stop the coup, the matter      is entirely in Vietnamese hands.
Harkins does not concur.
CAS Washington message 79407
To clear the air and redefine U.S. policy, Washington sent another cable      to Lodge.
The U.S. cannot accept as a policy position that it has no power      to prevent the coup.
If the coup does not have high prospects of success,      Lodge should intercede with the generals to have it delayed or called off.
More detailed information on the plans is urgently requested.
Specific instructions      to guide U.S. action during a coup are issued.
They prescribe strict noninvolvement      and somewhat less strict neutrality.
31 Oct 1963 Lodge defers departure
Lodge, who had been scheduled to leave for Washington for high-level conferences,      defers his departure because of the tense atmosphere and the apparent immenence      of the coup.
1 Nov 1963 Lodge and Felt meet with Diem
10:00 a.m. Admiral Felt, who is visiting, and Lodge call on Diem, who reiterates      many of the points he made to McNamara a month earlier.
At the end of the      meeting, Diem takes Lodge aside and indicates he is ready to talk about what      the U.S. wants him to do.
Felt leaves Saigon after the meeting.
Late morning Coup units begin to deploy
The first coup units begin to deploy in and around Saigon.
12:00 a.m. Officers meet at JGS
The coup committee has convened a meeting of all senior Vietnamese officers      except Generals Dinh and Cao at JGS.
There they are informed of the coup and      asked to support it.
All except Colonel Tung do.
Their pledges of support      are taped.
Tung is taken into custody later to be executed.
The CNO was killed      en route by an escort.
A CAS officer is invited to the JGS and maintains telephone      contact with the Embassy throughout the coup.
1:45 p.m. U.S. notified
General Don calls General Stillwell, J-3 to General Harkins, and informs      him that the coup is under way.
2:00 p.m. Key installations taken
About his time coup forces are seizing the key installations in Saigon, including      the post office, police headquarters, radio stations, airport, naval headquarters,      etc.
They were also deploying for attacks on the palace and the palace guard      barracks and to block any counter-attack from outside the city.
4:00 p.m. First skirmishes, Diem told to surrender
By about this time the first skirmish was taking place at the palace and      guard barracks.
Failing to reach General Dinh, Diem and Nhu realize the coup      is serious.
The generals called shortly after this and told the two brothers      to surrender.
They refused.
4:30 p.m. Coup broadcast, Diem calls Lodge
The generals go on radio, announce the coup and demand the resignation of      Diem and Nhu.
At the same time, Diem is calling Lodge.
He asks Lodge where      the U.S. stands.
Lodge replies that the U.S. cannot yet have a view.
He exprsses      concern for Diem's safety, and the conversation ends there.
5:00 p.m. Generals again call Diem to demand surrender
Repeated calls are now made to the palace to get Diem to surrender.
All the      generals try.
Colonel Tung is put on the phone and tells Diem he is a captive.
Tung is then taken outside and executed.
Diem and Nhu now frantically call      all unit commanders but can find none loyal.
Outside sporadic firing continues.
8:00 p.m. Diem and Nhu flee
Sometime in the early evening, probably about eight o'clock, the two brothers      escape from the palace through one of the secret underground passages constructed      for just such emergencies.
They are met by a Chinese friend who takes them      to a previously prepared hideaway in Cholon.
There they spend the night in      telephone contact with the palace.
9:00 p.m. Palace bombarded
At about nine o'clock, the attackers launch an artillery and armored barrage      on the palace and its defenders which lasts through the night.
2 Nov 1963 3:30 a.m. Assault on the palace begins
The tank and infantry assault on the Gia Long palace begins.
6: 20 a.m. Diem calls generals to surrender
Diem calls General Don from the Cholon hideout to surrender, but does not      tell his location.
6:30 a.m. Palace falls
Realizing the hopelessness of the situation, Diem issues a cease fire order      to the palace guard and the palace falls to the insurgents.
Colonel Thao,      the commander of the attacking forces, learns of Diem's whereabouts and with      JGS permission goes to arrest him.
6: 45 a.m. Diem and Nhu again escape
Arriving at the Cholon house, Thao calls JGS and is overheard by the brothers      who escape to a nearby Catholic church.
6:50 a.m. Diem and Nhu are captured
Diem again calls General Don and surrenders, this time unconditionally.
He      and Nhu are taken prisoner shortly thereafter and are murdered in the back      of an armored personnel carrier en route to JGS.
afternoon Vice President Tho confers on new government
Vice President Tho enters into intensive conferences and negotiations with      the coup committee on the composition of a new interim government which he      will head.
3 Nov 1963 Lodge meets with Generals Don and Kim
Generals Don and Kim call on Lodge at the Embassy and apologize for the absence      of Minh who is closeted with Tho working on the composition of the new government.
A two-tiered government is expected.
A military committee chaired by General      Minh will supervise a largely civilian cabinet under Tho's Prime Ministership.
Lodge promises the immediate restoration of aid programs and assures the generals      of forthcoming U.S. recognition.
4 Nov 1963 Lodge meets with General Minh
On instructions from Washington, Lodge meets with Minh and Don and urges      them to make a clarifying statement on the deaths of Diem and Nhu to allay      anxieties about the new leaders.
Minh promises to do so and to announce the      new government soon.
5 Nov 1963 New government announced
The new government is announced with Minh as President and Chief of the Military      Committee.
Tho is Premier, Minister of Economy and Minister of Finance.
Don      is Minister of Defense and Dinh is Minister of Security.
Most other posts      are filled by civilians, but there is a noticeable absence of well-known opponents      to Diem.
A later announcement suspends the 1956 constitution, and outlines      the structure and functions of the new interim government.
6 Nov 1963 Composition of the Military Revolutionary Council announced
Saigon Radio announces the composition of the new Military Revolutionary      Council with Minh as Chairman and including all important generals except      Khanh.
7 Nov 1963 NLF makes post-coup policy statement
In a post-coup policy statement, the NLF lists eight demands of the new regime,      all but one of which the Minh-Tho Government was going to do anyway.
Brent meets with Tho on U.S. aid
USOM Director Brent meets with Tho who indicated that all economic aid questions      would be handled directly by his office.
It was further agreed that a high-level      Vietnamese commission would work with a similar group in the U.S. mission      to establish economic and aid policies and levels.
8 Nov 1963 U.S. recognizes new government
Lodge calls on the new Foreign Minister, Pham Dang Lam, and presents a note      of U.S. recognition.
The new government will be heavily dependent on the U.S.      in all areas.
9 Nov 1963 Embassy Saigon message 986
In the weekly progress report, the mission notes the greatly increased VC      activity in the week following the coup.
The return of coup units to the field      will reverse this trend, it is hoped.
12 Nov 1963 CJNCPAC message to JCS 120604Z 63
CINCPAC takes note that the statistical indicators for the war (VC attacks,      weapons loss ratio, VC defections) show deterioration dating back to the summer.
17 Nov 1963 NLF releases stronger set of demands
Its first set of demands having been effectively preempted by the new Minh      Government, the NLF release a new and stronger set of demands including that      the U.S. influence be eliminated, the fighting be halted and that a coalition      government be established.
For the first time the NLF states that reunification      of Vietnam is an objective.
20 Nov 1963 Honolulu Conference
The entire country team meets with Rusk, McNamara, Taylor, Bundy, and Bell      to review the current situation.
Lodge voices optimism about the new government,      but notes the inexperience of the new leaders.
We should not press them too      hard.
We should secondly pledge aid to them in at least the amounts we were      giving it to Diem.
Brent notes the economic naivety of the generals and indicates      the need for greater U.S. technical assistance to the government.
Harkins'      assessment is guardedly optimistic, taking note of the higher than average      VC activity in the week after the coup.
The determination of the new leaders      impressed him, but he was concerned about the disruptions that wholesale replacements      of province and district chiefs might have.
Press release after Honolulu Conference
The press release gives few details but does reiterate the U.S. intention      to withdraw 1,000 troops by the end of the year.
22 Nov 1963 Lodge confers with the President
Having flown to Washington the day after the conference, Lodge meets with      the President and presumably continues the kind of report given in Honolulu.
23 Nov 1963 NSAM 273
Drawing together the results of the Honolulu Conference and Lodge's meeting      with the President, NSAM 273 reaffirms the U.S. commitment to defeat the VC      in South Vietnam.
It reiterates the plan to withdraw 1,000 troops by year's      end and to end the war in the first three corps areas by the end of 1964 and      in the Delta by the end of 1965.
U.S. support for the new regime is confirmed      and aid in at least the amounts given to Diem is guaranteed.
The Delta is      to be the area of concentration for all military, political, economic and      social efforts.
And clandestine operations against the North and into Laos      are authorized.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the spring of 1963, the regime of Ngo Dinh Diem seemed to exhibit no more    signs of advanced decay or imminent demise than might have been discerned since    1958 or 1959.
Only in hindsight can certain developments be identified as salient.
Of these, certainly the steadily increasing influence of the Nhus was the most    ominous.
Nhu came more and more to dominate Diem in the last year of the Diem    rule.
But as his power increased, Nhu's grip on reality seems to have slipped    and he was reported in that last year to have been smoking opium and to have    been mentally ill.
Meanwhile, Mrne.
Nhu was developing a power obsession of    her own.
The catastrophic effect of their influence during the ensuing crisis,    however, was impossible to have predicted.
As one perceptive observer noted,    the Ngo family "had come to power with a well-developed persecution complex    and had subsequently developed a positive mania for survival."
Another source of concern should have been the regime's self-imposed isolation    from the populace.
It had left the peasants apathetic, a cause for real concern    in a struggle with the zealous, doctrinaire Viet Cong; but, more importantly,    it had alienated large portions of the restive urban population who felt most    directly the impact of the regime's arbitrary rule.
The regime, in fact, had    no real base of political support and relied on the loyalty of a handful of    key military commanders to keep it in power by forestalling any overthrow.
The    loyalty of these men was bought with promotions and favors.
Graft and corruption    should also have drawn concern, even if governmental dishonesty was endemic    in Asia, and probably not disproportionate at that time in South Vietnam.
It was not, however, the strains that these problems had placed on the Vietnamese    political structure that were ultimately decisive.
The fundamental weakness    of the Diem regime was the curious rigidity and political insensitivity of its    mandarin style in the face of a dramatic crisis of popular confidence.
With regard to the war, the consensus of the U.S. military mission and the    U.S. intelligence community in the spring of 1963 was that the military situation    in South Vietnam was steadily improving and the war was beginning to be won.
A National Intelligence Estimate in April 1963 concluded that the infusion of    U.S. advisors had begun to have the desired effect of strengthening the ARVN    and increasing its aggressiveness.
[Doc.
121] The Viet Cong retained good strength,    but could be contained by the ARVN if they did not receive a great increase    in external support.
Statistical indices showed a decline in Viet Cong attacks    from the previous year, increased ARVN offensive activity, and improvement in    the weapons loss ratio.
Continuing problems were Diem's loyalty-based officer    promotion policy, ARVN desertions and AWOL's, poor intelligence, and low grade    NCO's and company grade officers.
Nonetheless, the overall outlook was sanguine.
Particular reason for encouragement was the adoption in February 1963 of the    National Campaign Plan urged by the U.S.
The hopeful prospects were summarized    for Secretary McNamara in a briefing paper for the Honolulu Conference of May    6:
The over-all situation in Vietnam is improving.
In the military sector of      the counterinsurgency, we are winning.
Evidences of improvement are clearly      visible, as the combined impact of the programs which involve a long lead      time begin to have effect on the Viet Cong.
Even as seasoned an observer of insurgency as Sir Robert Thompson, Chief of    the British Advisory Mission, was able to report that, "Now, in March 1963,    I can say, and in this I am supported by all members of the mission, that the    Government is beginning to win the shooting war against the Viet Cong."
One reason for the optimism of these appraisals was the vigor with which the    government, under the direction of Nhu, was pushing the Strategic Hamlet Program.
Nhu had been initially cool to the idea, but once he established the U.S. willingness    to fund the program, he focused on it as the principal vehicle of the counterinsurgency    campaign and as an excellent means of extending the oligarchy's control into    the countryside.
In April the GVN claimed it had completed 5,000 strategic hamlets    and had another 2,000 under construction.
There was already official U.S. misgiving,    however, about the quality of many of the hamlets and about overextension of    the country's limited human resources in the program's frantic rate of expansion.
Nevertheless, field reports seemed to support the success of the program which    was seen as the key to the struggle against the Viet Cong.
U.S.-GVN relations in the spring of 1963 were beginning to show signs of accumulating    stress.
As the U.S. commitment and involvement deepened, frictions between American    advisors and Vietnamese counterparts at all levels increased.
Diem, under the    influence of Nhu, complained about the quantity and zeal of U.S. advisors.
They    were creating a colonial impression among the people, he said.
Diem chose to    dramatize his complaint by delaying agreement on the commitment of South Vietnamese    funds for joint counterinsurgency projects.
The issue was eventually resolved,    but the sensitivity to the growing U.S. presence remained and as the long crisis    summer wore on, it gradually became a deep-seated suspicion of U.S. motives.
The report of the Mansfield mission, published in March, further exacerbated    relations between the two countries.
Diem and Nhu were particularly incensed    by its praise of Cambodian neutralism and criticism of their regime.
Coup rumors    began to circulate again that spring, and the prevailing palace state of mind    hearkened back to suspicions of U.S. complicity in the abortive 1960 coup.
Mme.    Nhu's ascorbic public criticism of the United States was a further source of    friction.
By May 1963, these problems in U.S.-GVN relations were already substantial    enough to preoccupy officials of both governments.
Within a matter of weeks,    however, events thrust them into the background of a far more serious crisis.
II.
THE BUDDHIST CRISIS: MAY 8-AUGUST 21
A.
THE CRISIS ERUPTS
The incident in Hue on May 8, 1963, that precipitated what came to be called    the Buddhist crisis, and that started the chain of events that ultimately led    to the overthrow of the Diem regime and the murder of the Ngo brothers, happened    both inadvertently and unexpectedly.
No one then foresaw that it would generate    a national opposition movement capable of rallying virtually all non-communist    dissidence in South Vietnam.
More importantly, no one then appreciated the degree    of alienation of Vietnam's people from their government, nor the extent of the    political decay within the regime, a regime no longer capable of coping with    popular discontent.
The religious origins of the incident are traceable to the massive flight of    Catholic refugees from North Vietnam after the French defeat in 1954.
An estimated    one million Catholics fled the North and resettled in the South.
Diem, animated,    no doubt, by religious as well as humanitarian sympathy, and with an eye to    recruiting political support from his coreligionists, accorded these Catholic    refugees preferential treatment in land redistribution, relief and assistance,    commercial and export-import licenses, government employment, and other GVN    largess.
Because Diem could rely on their loyalty, they came to fill almost    all important civilian and military positions.
As an institution, the Catholic    Church enjoyed a special legal status.
The Catholic primate, Ngo Dinh Thuc,    was Diem's brother and advisor.
But prior to 1962, there had been no outright    discrimination against Buddhists.
However, among South Vietnam's 3-4 million    practicing Buddhists and the 80% of the population who were nominal Buddhists,    the regime's favoritism, authoritarianism, and discrimination created a smoldering    resentment.
In April 1963, the government ordered provincial officials to enforce a longstanding    but generally ignored ban on the public display of religious flags.
The order    came just after the officially encouraged celebrations in Hue commemorating    the 25th anniversary of the ordination of Ngo Dinh Thuc, the Archbishop of Hue,    during which Papal flags had been prominently flown.
The order also came, as    it happened, just prior to Buddha's birthday (May 8)-a major Buddhist festival.
Hue, an old provincial capital of Vietnam, was the only real center of Buddhist    learning and scholarship in Vietnam and its university had long been a center    of left-wing dissidence.
Not surprisingly, then, the Buddhists in Hue defiantly    flew their flags in spite of the order and, when the local administration appeared    to have backed down on the ban, were emboldened to hold a previously scheduled    mass meeting on May 8 to commemorate Buddha's birthday.
Seeing the demonstration    as a challenge to family prestige (Hue was also the capital of the political    fief of another Diem brother, Ngo Dinh Can) and to government authority, local    officials tried to disperse the crowds.
When preliminary efforts produced no    results, the Catholic deputy province chief ordered his troops to fire.
In the    ensuing melee, nine persons were killed, including some children, and fourteen    were injured.
Armored vehicles allegedly crushed some of the victims.
The Diem    government subsequently put out a story that a Viet Cong agent had thrown a    grenade into the crowd and that the victims had been crushed in a stampede.
It steadfastly refused to admit responsibility even when neutral observers produced    films showing government troops firing on the crowd.
Diem's mandarin character would not permit him to handle this crisis with the    kind of flexibility and finesse it required.
He was incapable of publicly acknowledging    responsibility for the tragedy and seeking to conciliate the angry Buddhists.
He was convinced that such a public loss of face would undermine his authority    to rule, oblivious to the fact that no modern ruler can long ignore massive    popular disaffection whatever his own particular personal virtues may be.
So    the government clung tenaciously to its version of what had occurred.
The following day in Hue over 10,000 people demonstrated in protest of the    killings.
It was the first of the long series of protest activities with which    the Buddhists were to pressure the regime in the next four months.
The Buddhists    rapidly organized themselves, and on May 10, a manifesto of the Buddhist clergy    was transmitted to the government demanding freedom to fly their flag, legal    equality with the Catholic Church, an end of arrests and freedom to practice    their beliefs, and indemnification of the victims of the May 8th incident with    punishment for its perpetrators.
These five demands were officially presented    to President Diem on May 15, and the Buddhists held their first press conference    after the meeting.
Publicized hunger strikes and meetings continued throughout    May, but Diem continued to drag his feet on placating the dissenters or settling    issues.
On May 30, about 350 Buddhist monks demonstrated in front of the National    Assembly in Saigon, and a 48-hour hunger strike was announced.
On June 3, a    demonstration in Hue was broken up with tear gas and several people were burned,    prompting charges that the troops had used mustard gas.
On June 4, the government    announced the appointment of an interministerial committee headed by Vice President    Tho to resolve the religious issue, but by this time such gestures were probably    too late.
Large portions of the urban population had rallied to the Buddhist    protest, recognizing in it the beginnings of genuine political opposition to    Diem.
On June 8, Mme. Nhu exacerbated the problem by announcing that the Buddhists    were infiltrated by communists.
Throughout the early days of the crisis, the U.S. press had closely covered    the events and brought them to the attention of the world.
On June 11, the press    was tipped off to be at a downtown intersection at noon.
Expecting another protest    demonstration, they were horrified to witness the first burning suicide by a    Buddhist monk.
Thich Quang Duc's fiery death shocked the world and electrified    South Vietnam.
Negotiations had been taking place between Vice President Tho's committee and    the Buddhists since June 5, with considerable acrimonious public questioning    of good faith by both sides.
After the suicide, the U.S. intensified its already    considerable pressure on the government to mollify the Buddhists, and to bring    the deteriorating political situation under control.
Finally, on June 16, a    joint GVN-Buddhist communique was released outlining the elements of a settlement,    but affixing no responsibility for the May 8 incident.
Violent suppression by    the GVN of rioting the next day, however, abrogated the spirit of the agreement.
The Nhus, for their part, immediately undertook to sabotage the agreement by    secretly calling on the GVN-sponsored youth organizations to denounce it.
By    late June, it was apparent that the agreement was not meant as a genuine gesture    of conciliation by Diem, but was only an effort to appease the U.S. and paper    over a steadily widening fissure in internal politics.
The evident lack of faith on the part of the government in the June 16 agreement    discredited the conciliatory policy of moderation that the older Buddhist leadership    had followed until that time.
In late June, leadership of the Buddhist movement    passed to a younger, more radical set of monks, with more far-reaching political    objectives.
They made intelligent and skillful political use of a rising tide    of popular support.
Carefully planned mass meetings and demonstrations were    accompanied with an aggressive press campaign of opposition to the regime.
Seizing    on the importance of American news media, they cultivated U.S. newsmen, tipped    them off to demonstrations and rallies, and carefully timed their activities    to get maximum press coverage.
Not surprisingly, the Ngo family reacted with    ever more severe suppression to the Buddhist activists, and with acrimonious    criticism and even threats to the American newsmen.
Early in July, Vice President Tho's committee announced that a preliminary    investigation of the May 8 incident had confirmed that the deaths were the result    of an act of Viet Cong terrorism.
Outraged, the Buddhists denounced the findings    and intensified their protest activities.
On July 19, under U.S. pressure, Diem    made a brief two-minute radio address, ostensibly an expression of conciliation    to the Buddhists, but so written and coldly delivered as to destroy in advance    any effect its announced minor concessions might have had.
Within the regime, Nhu and his wife were severely criticizing Diem for caving    in under Buddhist pressure.
Mme. Nhu publicly ridiculed the Buddhist suicide    as a "barbecue," accused the Buddhist leaders of being infiltrated    with communists, and construed the protest movement as Viet Cong inspired.
Both    Nhu and his wife worked publicly and privately to undermine Diem's feeble efforts    at compromise with the Buddhists, and rumors that Nhu was considering a coup    against his brother began to circulate in July.
A U.S. Special National Intelligence Estimate on July 10 concluded with the    perceptive prediction that if the Diem regime did nothing to implement the June    16 agreement and to appease the Buddhists, the likelihood of a summer of demonstrations    was great, with the strong possibility of a non-communist coup attempt.
[Doc.
21] By mid-August a week before Nhu launched general raids on Buddhist pagodas    in Saigon and elsewhere, the CIA had begun to note malaise in the bureaucracy    and the army:
Since the Buddhist dispute with the Diem government erupted on 8 May, there      have been a series of reports indicating not only intensified plotting and      grumbling among Diem's traditional non-Communist critics, but renewed restiveness      and growing disaffection in official civilian and military circles over Diem's      handling of the dispute.
This estimate went on to detail numerous rumors of coup plots in existence    since at least late June.
But Nhu, in a bold move designed to frighten coup    plotters, and to throw them off guard, had called in the senior generals on    July 11, reprimanded them for not having taken action to squelch revolt, and    questioned their loyalty to the regime.
Nhu's move seemed to have temporarily    set back all plans for an overthrow.
CIA also reported rumors that Nhu himself    was planning a "false coup" to draw out and then crush the Buddhists.
In August, Buddhist militancy reached new intensity; monks burned themselves    to death on the 5th, 15th, and 18th.
The taut political atmosphere in Saigon    in mid-August should have suggested to U.S. observers that a showdown was on    the way.
When the showdown came, however, in the August 21 raids on the pagodas,    the U.S. mission was apparently caught almost completely off guard.
B.
THE U.S. "NO ALTERNATIVES TO DIEM" POLICY
The explanation of how the U.S. mission became detached from the realities    of the political situation in Saigon in August 1963, is among the most ironic    and tragic of our entire involvement in Vietnam.
In dealing with Diem over the    years, the U.S. had tried two radically different but ultimately equally unsuccessful    approaches.
Under Ambassador Elbridge Durbrow from the late '50s until 1961,    we had used tough pressure tactics to bring Diem to implement programs and ideas    we felt necessary to win the war against the Viet Cong.
But Diem soon learned    that the U.S. was committed to him as the only Vietnamese leader capable of    rallying his country to defeat the communists.
Armed with this knowledge he    could defer action or ignore the Ambassador with relative impunity.
He became    adept at playing the role of offended lover.
Thus by 1961, Durbrow was cut off    from the palace, with little information about what was going on and even less    influence over events.
Under Frederick Nolting as U.S. Ambassador, the U.S.    pursued a very different tactic.
Forewarned not to allow himself to be isolated,    Nolting set out through the patient cultivation of Diem's friendship and trust    to secure a role for himself as Diem's close and confidential advisor.
But there    had been no basic change in the American belief that there was no alternative    to Diem, and Diem must have quickly sensed this, for he continued to respond    primarily to family interest, at best only listening impatiently to Nolting's    carefully put complaints, secure in the knowledge that ultimately the U.S. would    not abandon him no matter what he did.
Both tactics failed because of American    commitment.
No amount of pressure or suasion was likely to be effective in getting    Diem to adopt ideas or policies which he did not find to his liking, since we    had communicated our unwillingness to consider the ultimate sanction--withdrawal    of support for his regime.
We had ensnared ourselves in a powerless, no alternatives    policy.
The denouement of this policy, the ultimate failure of all our efforts to coerce,    cajole and coax Diem to be something other than the mandarin that he was, came    in the midnight attack on the pagodas on August 21.
And it created a fundamental    dilemma for U.S. policy with respect to Diem.
On the one hand, withdrawal of    support for his regime was the only lever likely to force Diem to redress the    Buddhist grievances and to make the political reforms prerequisite for popular    support in the common fight against the Viet Cong.
On the other hand, withdrawal    of U.S. support for Diem would be signal U.S. approval for an anti-Diem coup,    with all its potential for political instability and erosion of the war effort.
We found ourselves in this predicament not entirely unexpectedly.
In May 1963, though it had failed to anticipate the Buddhist upheaval, the    U.S. mission nevertheless quickly recognized the gravity of the threat to Diem    and reported it to Washington.
Nolting met with Diem on May 18 and outlined    the steps he felt were necessary to retrieve the situation.
These included a    government acknowledgment of responsibility for the Hue incident, an offer to    compensate the families of the victims, and a reaffirmation of religious equality    and nondiscrimination.
As an alternative, he suggested an investigatory commission.
Diem's noncommittal response led the Ambassador to think that Diem really believed    the Viet Cong had caused the deaths and that the Buddhists had provoked the    incident.
Diem felt the U.S. was over-reacting to the events.
Thus, at a critical    time Nolting, in spite of his two years of careful groundwork, was unable to    exercise any real influence over Diem.
Nolting left on a well-deserved holiday    and home leave shortly after this frustrating meeting.
By the end of May, Washington had become concerned at Diem's failure to act,    and at the widening Buddhist protest.
The Charg d'Affaires, William    True-hart, was instructed to press the GVN for action.
Working with Secretary    of State for Defense Thuan, Truehart tried to move the government toward negotiations    with the Buddhists.
After the demonstrations in Hue on June 3, the State Department    instructed Truehart to tell Diem or Thuan that the U.S. also had a stake in    an amicable settlement with the Buddhists.
On the following day, True-hart met    with Thuan and told him that U.S. support of South Vietnam could not be maintained    if there was bloody repressive action in Hue.
This seemed to get action.
Later    that day, Truehart was informed that Nolting's second suggestion had been adopted    and a high-level commission had been named to settle the problem.
The commission,    headed by Vice President Tho, met belatedly with the Buddhists on June 5.
On June 8, Truehart had an interview with Diem to protest Mme. Nhu's public    criticism of the Buddhists, which was poisoning the atmosphere for a settlement.
When Diem refused to disavow her statements, Truehart threatened a U.S. "dissociation" from any future repressive measures to suppress demonstrations.
Truehart left    the meeting with the impression that Diem was more preoccupied with security    measures than with negotiations.
Nolting's low-key policy had by now been abandoned,    both in Washington and in Saigon, in favor of a new tough line.
The situation was dramatically altered by the first Buddhist suicide on June    11.
Alarmed, the State Department authorized Truehart to tell Diem that un'ess    drastic action was taken to meet the Buddhist demands promptly, the U.S. would    be forced to state publicly its dissociation from the GVN on the Buddhist issue.
Truehart made his demarche on June 12.
Diem replied that any such U.S. announcement    would have a disastrous effect on the GVN-Buddhist negotiations.
The negotiations    finally got under way in earnest June 14 and the joint communique was issued    June 16.
Truehart made repeated calls on Diem in late June and early July, urging him    in the strongest language to take some action indicating the government's intention    to abide in good faith by the June 16 agreement.
His effort's were unavailing.
Diem was either noncommittal, or talked in generalities about the difficulties    of the problem.
On June 27, President Kennedy named Henry Cabot Lodge to replace Ambassador    Nolting effective in September.
After a brief stop in Washington, Nolting was    hurried back to Saigon on July 11 to make one last effort to get Diem to conciliate    the Buddhists.
Nolting, evidently resenting the pressure tactics used by Truehart,    met immediately with Diem and tried to mollify him.
He succeeded only in convincing    Diem to make the shallow gesture of the July 19 radio speech.
Otherwise, Diem    merely persisted in appeals for public harmony and support of the government,    without any real attempt to deal with the Buddhist grievances.
Nolting spent his last month in Vietnam trying to repair U.S.-GVN relations    and to move Diem to resolve the Buddhist crisis, but his attempts were continually    undercut by the Nhus both publicly and privately.
They had grown increasingly    belligerent about the Buddhists during the summer, and by August spoke often    of "crushing" them.
Washington asked Nolting to protest such inflammatory    remarks, and began to suspect Diem's capacity to conciliate the Buddhists in    the face of Nhu sabotage.
Nolting was instructed to suggest to Diem that Mme.    Nhu be removed from the scene.
Nolting asked Diem for a public declaration repudiating    her remarks but after initially agreeing, Diem then demurred and postponed it.
Finally, as a parting gesture to Nolting, he agreed on August 14 to make a statement.
It came in the form of an interview with Marguerite Higgins of the New York    Herald Tribune.
Diem asserted that conciliation had been his policy all    along and that it was "irreversible."
He further said, in direct contradiction    of a previous remark by Mme. Nhu, that the family was pleased with Lodge's appointment.
Washington was apparently satisfied by this statement, which Diem viewed merely    as a going-away present for Nolting.
Less than a week later, Nolting's two years    of careful work and an American policy would be in a shambles, betrayed by Nhu's    midnight raid on the pagodas.
Underlying the prevailing U.S. view that there was no alternative to Diem was    the belief that the disruptive effect of a coup on the war effort, and the disorganization    that would follow such a coup, could only benefit the VC, perhaps decisively.
Military estimates and reports emanating from MACV through the summer of 1963    continued to reflect an optimistic outlook, indicating good reason to continue    our support of Diem even in the face of his inept handling of the Buddhist crisis.
In retrospect, it can be seen that by July the GVN position in the war had begun    to seriously deteriorate.
At the time, however, this weakening was not yet apparent.
The then prevailing view also held that the Buddhist crisis had not yet detracted    from the war effort, although its potential to do so was recognized.
Secretary    McNamara on July 19 told a press conference that the war was progressing well    and that the Buddhist crisis had thus far not affected it.
The intelligence    community, however, had already begun to note depressing effects of the crisis    on military and civilian morale.
Meanwhile, the U.S. press corps was reporting a far different view of both    the war and the Buddhist crisis, one which was, in retrospect, nearer the reality.
In particular, they were reporting serious failures in the Delta in both military    operations and the Strategic Hamlet Program.
Typical of this reporting was an    August 15 story in the New York Times by David Halberstam presenting a very    negative appraisal of the war in the Delta.
Such reports were vehemently refuted    within the Administration, most notably by General Krulak, the JCS Special Assistant    for Counterinsurgency.
At the lower echelons in the field, however, there were    many U.S. advisors who did not share Krulak's sanguine view of the war's progress.
Within the Administration, no real low-risk alternative to Diem had ever been    identified, and we had continued our support for his troublesome regime because    Diem was regarded as the only Vietnamese figure capable of rallying national    support in the struggle against the Viet Cong.
The Buddhist crisis shattered    our illusions about him, and increased the domestic U.S. political price to    Kennedy of supporting Diem.
But the only other option for us seemed a coup,    with highly uncertain prospects for post-coup political stability.
At a briefing    for the President on July 4, the possibilities and prospects for a coup were    discussed.
[Doc.
123] It was the consensus that the Nhus could not be removed,    but that there would surely be coup attempts in the next four months.
Nolting's    reported view, with which then Assistant Secretary of State, Roger Hilsman,    did not entirely agree, was that a coup would most likely produce a civil war.
Hilsman felt that the likelihood of general chaos in the wake of a coup was    less than it had been the preceding year.
(Notes on this briefing, reproduced    in the Appendix, provide the first documentary evidence of highest level consideration    of the ramifications of a coup.)
In a meeting at State the following day, July 5, Ambassador Nolting, who had    cut short his vacation to return to Washington in the wake of the Buddhist crisis,    told Under Secretary of State George Ball:
In his view if a revolution occurred in Viet-Nam which grew out of the Buddhist      situation, the country would be split between feuding factions and the Americans      would have to withdraw and the country might be lost to the Communists.
This      led to the question of how much pressure we could exert on Diem.
Mr. Nolting      replied that if we repudiated him on this issue his government would fall.
The Ambassador believed that Diem would live up to the agreement (June 16)      unless he believed that he was dealing with a political attempt to cause his      overthrow.
[Doc.
124]
Earlier in the same interview he had said:
....that although interference by the Nhus was serious, he believed that      the GVN would be able to come through this one slowly.
As to tactics, the      more Diem was prodded the slower he went.
While Nhu was troublesome he was      chiefly responsible for gains which had been made in the provincial pacification      program.
[Doc.
124]
Nolting, no doubt, expressed similar views when he met with Secretary McNamara    before returning to Saigon.
In spite of the mounting political pressure on the President in Congress and    in the press because of the Buddhist repressions, the Administration decided    to send Nolting back for another try at getting Diem to settle the dispute with    the Buddhists.
Anxiety in Washington mounted as the summer wore on, and Nolting's    efforts with Diem produced evident progress.
By the time of the August 21 raids,    Washington's patience with Diem was all but exhausted.