JUL
MAR
Apr
26
2015
2016
2017
2 captures
18 Jul 15 - 26 Mar 16
Close Help
for Teachers   for Schools   for Companies
Log In
Menu
Plans
Courses Courses
Find Courses by Subject
Find Courses by Subject
Science
Math
Business
Psychology
History
English
Social Science
Humanities
Spanish
ACT & SAT Test Prep
Teacher Certification
Professional Development
By Education Level
By Education Level
College
High School
Middle School
Browse All Courses
Explore Over
1000+
video courses
Browse All Courses
Credit Credit
Credit Options
Online College Credit
High School & GED
Certificates of Completion
How it Works
Earn Transferable Credit & Get your Degree fast
Learn More
Degrees Degrees
Find Degrees by Subject
Find Degrees by Subject
Agriculture
Architecture
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
Business
Communications and Journalism
Computer Sciences
Culinary Arts and Personal Services
Education
 
Engineering
Legal
Liberal Arts and Humanities
Mechanic and Repair Technologies
Medical and Health Professions
Physical Sciences
Psychology
Transportation and Distribution
Visual and Performing Arts
Find Degrees by Level
By Level
High School Diploma
Associates Degrees
Bachelor Degrees
Master Degrees
Online Degrees
Search All Degrees
Find a Degree that fits your Goals
Search Degrees
Schools Schools
Browse Schools by Degree Level
Browse Schools by Degree Level
Graduate Degrees
High School Diplomas
Certificate Programs
Post Degree Certificates
Undergraduate Degrees
Browse Schools
Browse Schools
Public Schools by State
University Video Reviews
Career Counseling & Job Center
Career Counseling & Job Center
Job Interviewing Tip Videos
Job Networking Videos
Résumé How To Videos
Job Search Tips
Career Videos
Career Research
Career Research
Researching Careers Videos
Glossary of Careers
Career Info by Degree
Job Outlook by Region
Degree & Career Research Articles
Create Account
Contact Support
Login
Sign Up
for Teachers   for Schools   for Companies
Video: A Revolving Door of Leadership in South Vietnam
Following the loss of Ngo Dinh Diem, the United States faced a cycle of leadership changes in South Vietnam. Learn about the revolving leadership and how it impacted the United States' effort in the Vietnam War in this lesson.
 History 108: History of the Vietnam War  /  History Courses
Course Navigator
The Air War: Events and Key OperationsNext Lesson 
A Revolving Door of Leadership in South Vietnam
Chapter 4 /  Lesson 2   Transcript
Video
Quiz & Worksheet - The Changing Leadership in South Vietnam Quiz
Course
Watch short & fun videos Start Your Free Trial Today
An error occurred trying to load this video.
Try refreshing the page, or contact customer support.
You must create an account to continue watching
Register for a free trial
Are you a student or a teacher?
I am a student
I am a teacher
What is your educational goal?
 Back
Start Your Free Trial To Continue Watching
As a member, you'll also get unlimited access to over
lessons in math, English, science, history, and more. Plus, get practice tests, quizzes, and personalized coaching to help you succeed.
Free 5-day trial
It only takes a few minutes to set up and you can cancel at any time.
Already registered? Login here for                 access
 Back
You're on a roll. Keep up the good work!
Take Quiz Watch Next Lesson
 Replay
Just checking in. Are you still watching?
Yes! Keep playing.
Your next lesson will play in 10 seconds
Coming up next: The Air War: Events and Key Operations
0:01 Opening Pandora's Box
0:56 General Minh
2:22 General Khanh
3:42 The Civilian Government
5:00 The Young Turks
7:08 Lesson Summary
Timeline
Autoplay
Autoplay
Create an account to start this course today
Try it free for 5 days!
Create An Account
Recommended Lessons and Courses for You
Related Lessons
Related Courses
First Indochina War: Battle of Dien Bien Phu & the Geneva Conference
Ngo Dinh Diem: Rise to Power, Foreign Ties & Strategies
The Soviet Union Under Stalin: Five-Year Plans, Purges & Policies
Vietnam Turning Points: The Buddhist Crisis, Kennedy Assassination & More
Indochina from 1900 to 1945: Culture, Government & Unrest
Two-Party & Multi-Party Systems: Similarities & Differences
Alternation of Generations: The Gametophyte and Sporophyte
Women in Puritan Society: Roles & Rights
Post-WWII Independence Movements Around the World: History & Examples
Primary Functions of Protein in the Body
Four Quantum Numbers: Principal, Angular Momentum, Magnetic & Spin
1920s American Culture: City Life & Values
Narrative Techniques in Writing: Definition, Types & Examples
Masculine vs. Feminine Cultures: Distinctions & Communication Styles
Forms of Government: Monarchy, Democracy, Oligarchy & More
The Enlightenment Thinkers & Their Ideas
US Marine Corps vs the National Liberation Front: Operation Starlite
Homeostasis and Temperature Regulation in Humans
Emperors of the Julio-Claudian Dynasty
Eisenhower's Foreign Policy in Southeast Asia in the 1950s
DSST A History of the Vietnam War: Study Guide & Test Prep
History of the Vietnam War: Certificate Program
History 104: US History II
Political Science 102: American Government
CLEP Social Sciences and History: Study Guide & Test Prep
McDougal Littell Modern World History - Patterns of Interaction: Online Textbook Help
Western Civilization 1648 to the Present: Help and Review
The Vietnam War: Help and Review
CLEP Western Civilization II: Study Guide & Test Prep
UExcel World Conflicts Since 1900: Study Guide & Test Prep
American Revolution Study Guide
World Conflicts Since 1900: Certificate Program
DSST Western Europe Since 1945: Study Guide & Test Prep
Western Civilization From 1648 to Today: Certificate Program
Western Europe Since 1945: Certificate Program
Religion 101: Intro to World Religions
Supplemental History: Study Aid
History 109: Western Europe Since 1945
History 107: World Conflicts Since 1900
AP World History: Help and Review
Lesson Transcript
Instructor: Adam Richards
Adam has a master's degree in history.
Following the loss of Ngo Dinh Diem, the United States faced a cycle of leadership changes in South Vietnam. Learn about the revolving leadership and how it impacted the United States' effort in the Vietnam War in this lesson.
Opening Pandora's Box
The successful coup d'état against Ngo Dinh Diem, president of the Republic of Vietnam (RVN), or South Vietnam, in November of 1963 created a power vacuum in the region. From the end of 1963 to the American exit of the Vietnam War in 1973, the United States faced a carousel of leadership in South Vietnam that was often inept and defiant. Why is this important to examine?
Well, the fluid political situation in South Vietnam caused complications for the United States' war effort. The varying personalities involved all wanted to pursue different strategies. Additionally, much of the leadership often failed to win the support of the Vietnamese. This was vital because the United States needed this support to stabilize the region in cultural and political terms and help eliminate members of the National Liberation Front, or NLF, based within South Vietnamese villages. Let's take a look at the post-Diem leaders of South Vietnam.
General Minh
General Duong Van Minh helped create the Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) and served as a military advisor to Diem. Following Diem's removal in November, Minh created the Military Revolutionary Council, and became the president of the South Vietnam. His political cabinet consisted primarily of military generals, notwithstanding his Prime Minister Nguyen Ngoc Tho. Minh removed many Diem-era sanctions within South Vietnam, reopening newspapers, eliminating the constitution and relocating troops. The United States placed its full support behind Minh by recognizing his leadership and providing aid, material and personnel to the government in order to combat the NLF.
Complications quickly arose during Minh's tenure. While the Military Revolutionary Council was a noble idea, it deteriorated into a power grab by the competing military generals. Minh eliminated Diem's province chiefs, which caused local governments to fail and spawned backlash from citizens. His relocation of troops into nonessential areas of South Vietnam resulted in significant infiltration of NLF insurgents into important cities, such as Saigon and Hue.
Minh also scrapped the Strategic Hamlet Program, which opened South Vietnamese villages to the NLF. By January 1964, NLF activity in South Vietnam had drastically grown. While the United States questioned the leadership of Minh, other South Vietnamese factions took action. On January 30, Minh was bloodlessly removed from power by rival military officer, General Nguyen Khanh.
General Khanh
Sensing the American and Vietnamese distrust against the Minh regime, Khanh removed the Military Revolutionary Council from power and took control of South Vietnam. Interestingly, Khanh allowed Minh to remain in position as the head of state. This essentially became a nominal title as Khanh ruled South Vietnam from the position of prime minister.
The United States viewed Khanh optimistically; it hoped a single ruler might once again stabilize South Vietnam. Additionally, Khanh was willing to listen to the advice of American leaders and military personnel. He quickly adopted the United States' strategy of pacification by delivering personal visits and speeches to South Vietnamese villages and cities. However, internal complications quickly damaged Khanh's image.
The South Vietnamese army was not progressing as quickly as the United States had hoped; it was losing both minor skirmishes and major battles. The Strategic Hamlet Program, which Khanh hoped to revive, struggled. Khanh failed to protect local governments, which resulted in public chaos, polarization and further infiltration by the NLF. Backlash against Khanh rose significantly from Buddhists, Catholics, students and laborers. Eventually, he was forced to militarize many large cities to quell the opposition. By fall of 1964, American officials believed that the Khanh government was on the brink of collapse. His end came on October 30, when he resigned amid mass protest.
The Civilian Government
From November 1964 to June 1965, South Vietnam was under the leadership of what became known as the 'civilian government.' Phan Khac Suu, a Vietnamese engineer, served as the president of South Vietnam, while Dr. Phan Huy Quat, a medical specialist, was the prime minister. Many within South Vietnam believed that Phan Khac Suu was the natural heir to the presidency following the Diem assassination; his civilian government was a welcome sign.
The civilian government stressed a rapprochement of Vietnamese citizens. It pursued peace over internal opposition, and many of its programs helped maintain order throughout the first half of 1965. United States officials placed Phan Huy Quat in charge of the Americanization process, but he was strongly opposed to an increased presence of the United States in South Vietnam. The prime minister often resisted many American initiatives and often stalled the Americanization process.
Additionally, the NLF gained a stronghold of territory in South Vietnam. The United States eventually began sidestepping the civilian government. Simultaneously, a South Vietnamese faction known as the 'Young Turks,' comprised of General Nguyen Van Thieu and Vice Air Marshal Nguyen Cao Ky, garnered the attention of the United States. After mounting external opposition and the presence of the Young Turks, the civilian government peacefully dissolved on June 11.
The Young Turks
Nguyen Van Thieu became the head of state in June 1965 (officially elected president in October 1967), and Nguyen Cao Ky assumed the role of prime minister of South Vietnam. The United States respected Thieu as a capable leader, although its feelings toward Ky were much different. Many within the Johnson Administration believed Ky was flamboyant, as he often wore a military jump suit complete with a purple scarf and ivory-handled pistol, and too outspoken. Regardless, the Thieu-Ky regime was the longest lasting administration since the Diem era, with at least one of the Young Turks in office from 1965 to 1975.
×
Unlock Content
Over 10,000 lessons in all major subjects
Get FREE access for 5 days,
just create an account.
Start a FREE trial
No obligation, cancel anytime.
Want to learn more?
Select a subject to preview related courses:
Math
History
English
ACT/SAT
Science
Business
Psychology
AP
Early in the war, both men worked with the United States in order to defeat North Vietnam. They were pivotal in supporting the Americanization of the war effort (although this caused complications for the United States), ending local village corruption within South Vietnam and establishing better lines of communication between South Vietnamese generals in order to quell infighting and create better leadership.
Yet, like previous administrations, the prowess of the Thieu-Ky regime slowly deteriorated for a number of reasons. First, since the Army of the Republic of Vietnam struggled to be an effective combat force, Thieu and Ky relied heavily on American combat troops to carry out the bulk of the fighting against the North Vietnamese. This became problematic by 1969 when President Richard Nixon introduced the program of 'Vietnamization,' or the process of turning the war over to the South Vietnamese, and began to withdraw American forces. Second, a bitter strife developed between Thieu and Ky, which resulted in Ky resigning in 1971. Finally, the removal of Thieu from power was a point of emphasis for the North Vietnamese prior to entering into peace negotiations.
Both President Lyndon B. Johnson and Nixon defended Thieu's continued leadership as a part of any post-war agreement, but by 1972 the goal of the United States was to end its involvement in the war. Thieu attempted to block potential negotiations between the United States and North Vietnam, fearing abandonment and an inevitable communist takeover. By 1973, Thieu was strong armed into accepting the Paris Peace Accords. His government, without the support of the United States, lasted only two additional years.
Lesson Summary
The death of Ngo Dinh Diem in November 1963 created a power vacuum in South Vietnam that was filled by a number of individuals throughout the rest of the Vietnam War. General Duong Van Minh was the first successor, but his aloofness and irresponsibility led to him being overthrown in a bloodless coup by General Nguyen Khanh. The United States supported Khanh, although his aggressive assimilation techniques at the village level caused an opposition movement which forced his removal.
The civilian government, comprised of Phan Khac Suu and Phan Huy Quat, stressed a rapprochement between South Vietnamese citizens, but it lost significant support with the United States when it stalled American combat efforts. The Young Turks, the final leadership installment comprised of Nguyen Van Thieu and Nguyen Cao Ky, had the utmost support of the United States. They abided by the demands of the United States; however, the administration deteriorated due to Vietnamization, an intra-office rivalry and the Paris Peace Accords of 1973. The constant cycle of leadership in South Vietnam significantly hindered the American war effort.
To unlock this lesson you must be a Study.com Member.
Create your account
Register for a free trial
Are you a student or a teacher?
I am a student
I am a teacher
What is your educational goal?
 Back
Unlock Your Education
See for yourself why 10 million people use Study.com
Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Become a Member
Already a member? Log In
 Back
Description
Summary:
Visit the History 108: History of the Vietnam War page to learn more.
Earning Credit
Earning College Credit
Did you know… We have over 49 college                     courses that prepare you to earn                     credit by exam that is accepted by over 2,000 colleges and universities. You can test out of the                     first two years of college and save thousands off your degree. Anyone can earn                     credit-by-exam regardless of age or education level.
To learn more, visit our Earning Credit Page
Transferring credit to the school of your choice
Not sure what college you want to attend yet? Study.com has thousands of articles about every                         imaginable degree, area of                         study                         and career path that can help you find the school that's right for you.
Research Schools, Degrees & Careers
Get the unbiased info you need to find the right school.
Browse Articles By Category
Browse an area of study or degree level.
Area of Study
Agriculture
Architecture
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
Business
Communications and Journalism
Computer Sciences
Culinary Arts and Personal Services
Education
Engineering
Legal
Liberal Arts and Humanities
Mechanic and Repair Technologies
Medical and Health Professions
Physical Sciences
Psychology
Transportation and Distribution
Visual and Performing Arts
Degree Level
High School Diploma
Associates Degrees
Bachelor Degrees
Master Degrees
Online Degrees
Recommended Articles
Related
Recently Updated
Popular
Salary for a PhD in Organizational Leadership
Master in Organizational Leadership: Degree Overview
MBA in Leadership Studies: Degree Overview
Graduate Degrees in Safety Leadership: Program Options
Masters Certificate in Organizational Leadership: Program Overview
Top Instructional Leadership Program in Chicago
Master's Degree in Community Leadership: Program Information
Master's Degree in Christian Leadership: Program Overview
Online Degree Programs in Christian Leadership: Program Overview
Online Doctoral Degree in Business Leadership
Adult School Programs for Becoming a Media Reporter
Historic Preservation Training and Career Information
Management Training: Overview of Adult Education MGMT Training Programs
Begin a Career in ABA Therapy Options and Requirements
Personal Care Aide Job Description Duties and Requirements
Computer Software Majors
Web Content Manager Job Description and Requirements
Distance Learning Marriage and Family Therapy Graduate Degree Program
×
Course Navigator
 Back To Course
History 108: History of the Vietnam War
7 chapters | 32 lessons
1 - Roots of the Vietnam War
Go to Roots of the Vietnam War
2 - Unrest in Vietnam During the Eisenhower Years
Go to Unrest in Vietnam During the Eisenhower Years
3 - John F Kennedy and the Vietnam War
Go to John F Kennedy and the Vietnam War
4 - Lyndon B. Johnson and the Vietnam War
Gulf of Tonkin Crisis and Resolution: Events and Congressional Response 6:42
A Revolving Door of Leadership in South Vietnam 8:14
7:43
Next Lesson
The Air War: Events and Key Operations
Johnson Americanizes the War in Vietnam 8:46
Johnson's Military Strategies for American Success 7:49
Opposition to the Vietnam War, 1965-1968 7:13
People's Army of Vietnam and the National Liberation Front 6:52
Go to Lyndon B. Johnson and the Vietnam War
5 - Vietnam War During the Nixon Years
Go to Vietnam War During the Nixon Years
6 - Major Battles & Offensives of the Vietnam War
Go to Major Battles & Offensives of the Vietnam War
7 - The Vietnam War After American Involvement
Go to The Vietnam War After American Involvement
Like this lesson Share
Explore our library of over 10,000 lessons
Search
Browse
Browse by subject
College Courses
Business
English
Foreign Language
History
Humanities
Math
Science
Social Science
See All College Courses
High School Courses
AP
Common Core
GED
High School
See All High School Courses
Other Courses
College & Career Guidance Courses
College Placement Exams
Entrance Exams
General Test Prep
K-8 Courses
Skills Courses
Teacher Certification Exams
See All Other Courses
Click "next lesson" whenever you finish a lesson and quiz. Got It
You now have full access to our lessons and courses. Watch the lesson now or keep exploring. Got It
You're 25% of the way through this course! Keep going at this rate,and you'll be done before you know it.
1
The first step is always the hardest! Congrats on finishing your first lesson. Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
5
Way to go! If you watch at least 30 minutes of lessons each day you'll master your goals before you know it. Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
10
Congratulations on earning a badge for watching 10 videos but you've only scratched the surface. Keep it up! Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
20
You've just watched 20 videos and earned a badge for your accomplishment! Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
50
You've just earned a badge for watching 50 different lessons. Keep it up, you're making great progress! Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
100
You just watched your 100th video lesson. You have earned a badge for this achievement! Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
200
Congratulations! You just finished watching your 200th lesson and earned a badge! Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
300
Congratulations! You just finished watching your 300th lesson and earned a badge! Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
500
You are a superstar! You have earned the prestigious 500 video lessons watched badge. Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
1K
Incredible. You have just entered the exclusive club and earned the 1000 videos watched badge. Go to Next Lesson Take Quiz
20
You have earned a badge for watching 20 minutes of lessons.
50
You have earned a badge for watching 50 minutes of lessons.
100
You have earned a badge for watching 100 minutes of lessons.
250
You have earned a badge for watching 250 minutes of lessons.
500
You have earned a badge for watching 500 minutes of lessons.
1K
You have earned a badge for watching 1000 minutes of lessons.
Follow Us:
Home | About Us | Careers | Teach for Us | FAQ | Contact Support
Terms of Use | Privacy Policy
© copyright 2003-                           2016 Study.com. All other trademarks and copyrights are         the property of their respective owners. All rights reserved.