Jesus College, Oxford Explained
Jesus College in the University of Oxford of Queen Elizabeth's Foundation
Latin Name:
Vert, three stags trippant argent attired or.
Homepage:
Boat Club website
Jesus College (in full: Jesus College in the University of Oxford of Queen Elizabeth's Foundation) is one of the colleges of the University of Oxford in England.
It is in the centre of the city , on a site between Turl Street , Ship Street , Cornmarket Street and Market Street .
The college was founded by Elizabeth I on 27 June 1571 for the education of clergy, though students now study a broad range of secular subjects.
A major driving force behind the establishment of the college was Hugh Price (or Ap Rhys), a churchman from Brecon in Wales .
The oldest buildings, in the first quadrangle , date from the 16th and early 17th centuries; a second quadrangle was added between about 1640 and about 1713, and a third quadrangle was built in about 1906.
Further accommodation was built on the main site to mark the 400th anniversary of the college, in 1971, and student flats have been constructed at sites in north and east Oxford.
The life of the college was disrupted by the English Civil War .
Leoline Jenkins , who became principal after the war in 1661, put the college on a more stable financial footing.
Little happened at the college during the 18th century, and the 19th century saw a decline in numbers and academic standards.
Reforms of Oxford University after two Royal Commission s in the latter half of the 19th century led to removal of many of the restrictions placed on the college's fellowships and scholarship s, such that the college ceased to be predominantly full of Welsh students and academics.
Students' academic achievements rose in the early 20th century as fellows were appointed to teach in new subjects.
Women were first admitted in 1974 and now form a large part of the undergraduate population.
There are about 475 students; the Principal of the college is Sir Nigel Shadbolt .
Former students include Harold Wilson (who was twice British Prime Minister ), Norman Washington Manley ( Chief Minister of Jamaica ), T. E. Lawrence ("Lawrence of Arabia"), Angus Buchanan (winner of the Victoria Cross ), and Viscount Sankey ( Lord Chancellor ).
The university's professorship of Celtic is attached to the college, a post held by scholars such as Sir John Rhys , Ellis Evans and Thomas Charles-Edwards .
Past or present fellows of the college include the historians Sir Goronwy Edwards and Niall Ferguson , the philosopher Galen Strawson and the political philosopher John Gray .
History
Foundation
See also: List of founding Fellows, Scholars and Commissioners of Jesus College, Oxford .
Jesus College was founded on 27 June 1571, when Elizabeth I issued a royal charter .
It was the first Protestant college to be founded at the university, and it is the only Oxford college to date from Elizabeth's reign.
[2] [3] It was the first new Oxford college since 1555, in the reign of Queen Mary , when Trinity College and St John's College were founded as Roman Catholic colleges.
[4] The foundation charter named a principal ( David Lewis ), eight fellows, eight scholars , and eight commissioners to draw up the statutes for the college.
[5] The commissioners included Hugh Price , who had petitioned the queen to found a college at Oxford "that he might bestow his estate of the maintenance of certain scholars of Wales to be trained up in good letters."
[6] The college was originally intended primarily for the education of clergy.
The particular intention was to satisfy a need for dedicated, learned clergy to promote the Elizabethan Religious Settlement in the parishes of England, Ireland and Wales.
The college has since broadened the range of subjects offered, beginning with the inclusion of medicine and law, and now offers almost the full range of subjects taught at the university.
The letters patent issued by Elizabeth I made it clear that the education of a priest in the 16th century included more than just theology, however: [7]
Price continued to be closely involved with the college after its foundation.
On the strength of a promised legacy, worth £60 a year on his death (approximately £ in present day terms), he requested and received the authority to appoint the new college's principal, fellows and scholars.
He financed early building work in the college's front quadrangle , but on his death in 1574 it transpired that the college received only a lump sum of around £600 (approximately £ in present day terms).
Problems with his bequest meant that it was not received in full for about 25 years.
As the college had no other donors at this time, "for many years the college had buildings but no revenue".
[8]
17th century
The main benefactor, other than the King, was Eubule Thelwall , from Ruthin , North Wales, who became Principal in 1621; he succeeded in securing a new charter and statutes for the college from James I , having spent £5,000 of his own money on the hall and chapel, which earned him the title of its second founder.
[9] Thelwall died on 8 October 1630, aged 68 and was buried in Jesus College Chapel where a monument was erected to his memory by his brother Sir Bevis Thelwall (Page of the King's Bedchamber and Clerk of the Great Wardrobe).
Other benefactions in the 17th century include Herbert Westfaling , the Bishop of Hereford , left enough property to support two fellowships and scholarships (with the significant proviso that "my kindred shallbe always preferred before anie others").
[10] Sir Eubule Thelwall (principal 1621–30) spent much of his own money on the construction of a chapel, hall and library for the college.
The library, constructed above an over-weak colonnade , was pulled down under the principalship of Francis Mansell (1630–49), who also built two staircases of residential accommodation to attract the sons of Welsh gentry families to the College.
The English Civil War "all but destroyed the corporate life of the college."
[11] Mansell was removed from his position as principal and Michael Roberts was installed.
After the Restoration , Mansell was briefly reinstated as principal, before resigning in favour of Leoline Jenkins .
[11] [12] It was Jenkins (principal 1661–73) who secured the long-term viability of the college.
On his death, in 1685, he bequeathed a large complex of estates, acquired largely by lawyer friends from the over-mortgaged landowners of the Restoration period.
These estates allowed the college's sixteen fellowships and scholarships to be filled for the first time – officially, sixteen of each had been supported since 1622, but the college's income was too small to keep all occupied simultaneously.
[13] In 1713, the bequest of Welsh clergyman and former student Edmund Meyrick e established a number of scholarships for students from north Wales.
[14]
18th and 19th centuries
The 18th century, in contrast to the disruption of the 17th century, was a comparatively quiet time for the college.
A historian of the college, J. N. L. Baker , wrote that the college records for this time "tell of little but routine entries and departures of fellows and scholars".
[14] The Napoleonic wars saw a reduction in the numbers of students and entries in the records for the purchase of musket s and other items for college members serving in the university corps.
After the war, numbers rose, to an average of twenty new students per year between 1821 and 1830.
However, debts owed to the college had increased, perhaps due to the economic effects of the war – by 1832, the college was owed £986 10s 5d (approximately £ in present day terms).
[14] [15] During the first half of the 19th century, the academic strength of the college diminished: scholarships were sometimes not awarded because of a lack of suitable candidates, and numbers fell: there were only seven new entrants in 1842.
[15] Ernest Hardy wrote in his history of the college in 1899 that it had been becoming "increasingly evident for years... that the exclusive connection with Wales was ruining the college as a place of education."
[16]
A Royal Commission was appointed in 1852 to investigate the university.
The college wished to retain its links with Wales, and initial reforms were limited despite the wishes of the commissioners: those scholarships that were limited to particular parts of Wales were opened to the whole of Wales, and half of the fellowships awarded were to remain open only to Welshmen if and so long as the Principal and Fellows shall deem it expedient for the interests of education in connection with the Principality of Wales.
[15] All the scholarships at the college, except for two, and all the exhibitions were still restricted to students from Wales.
[17] The numbers of students at the college still fell, despite prizes being awarded for success in university examinations.
Daniel Harper , principal from 1877 to 1895, noted the continuing academic decline.
Speaking in 1879, he noted that fewer students from the college were reaching high standards in examinations, and that more Welsh students were choosing to study at other Oxford colleges in preference to Jesus.
A further Royal Commission was appointed.
This led to further changes at the college: in 1882, the fellowships reserved to Welshmen were made open to all, and only half (instead of all) of the 24 scholarships were to be reserved for Welsh candidates.
[18] [19] Thereafter, numbers gradually rose and the non-Welsh element at the college increased, so that by 1914 only about half of the students were Welsh.
[18]
20th century
During the First World War , "the college in the ordinary sense almost ceased to exist".
[18] From 129 students in the summer of 1914, numbers dropped to 36 in the spring of 1916.
Some refugee students from Belgium and Serbia lodged in empty rooms in the college during 1916, and officers of the Royal Flying Corps resided from August 1916 to December 1918.
After the war, numbers rose and fellowships were added in new subjects: history (1919 and 1933); theology (1927); physics (1934); a second fellowship in chemistry (1924); and modern languages (lectureship 1921, fellowship 1944).
The improved teaching led to greater success in university examinations and prizes.
[20]
In the inter-war years (1918–39) Jesus was seen by some as a small college and something of a backwater; it attracted relatively few pupils from the public schools traditionally seen as the most prestigious.
[21] The college did, however, attract many academically able entrants from the grammar schools (particularly those in northern England and Scotland).
Among these grammar-school boys was Harold Wilson , who would later become Prime Minister of the United Kingdom .
[22] During the Second World War, many of the fellows served in the armed forces or carried out war work in Oxford.
The college remained full of students, though, as it provided lodgings for students from other colleges whose buildings had been requisitioned, and also housed officers on military courses.
[23]
The college had its own science laboratories from 1907 to 1947, which were overseen (for all but the last three years) by the physical chemist David Chapman , a fellow of the college from 1907 to 1944.
At the time of their closure, they were the last college-based science laboratories at the university.
[24] They were named the Sir Leoline Jenkins laboratories, after a former principal of the college.
The laboratories led to scientific research and tuition (particularly in chemistry) becoming an important part of the college's academic life.
[25] The brochure produced for the opening ceremony noted that the number of science students at the college had increased rapidly in recent years, and that provision of college laboratories would assist the tuition of undergraduates, as well as attracting to Jesus College graduates of the University of Wales who wished to continue their research at Oxford.
A link between one of the college science lecturers and Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) led to 17 students joining ICI between the two World Wars, some, such as John Rose , reaching senior levels in the company.
The laboratories became unnecessary when the university began to provide centralised facilities for students; they were closed in 1947.
[25]
The quatercentenary of the college, in 1971, saw the opening of the Old Members' Buildings in the third quadrangle.
Further student accommodation has been built at the sports ground and at a site in north Oxford.
In 1974, Jesus was among the first group of five men's colleges to admit women as members, the others being Brasenose , Wadham , Hertford and St Catherine's ; [26] between one-third and one-half of the undergraduates are women.
A long-standing rivalry with nearby Exeter College reached a peak in 1979, with seven police vehicles and three fire engines involved in dealing with trouble in Turl Street.
[27] Sir John Habakkuk (principal 1967–84) and Sir Peter North (principal 1984–2005) both served terms as Vice-Chancellor of the university, from 1973 to 1977 and from 1993 to 1997 respectively.
[28]
Location and buildings
See main article: Buildings of Jesus College, Oxford .
The main buildings are located in the centre of Oxford, between Turl Street , Ship Street , Cornmarket Street and Market Street .
The main entrance is on Turl Street.
The buildings are arranged in three quadrangle s, the first quadrangle containing the oldest college buildings and the third quadrangle the newest.
The foundation charter gave to the college a site between Market Street and Ship Street (which is still occupied by the college) as well as the buildings of a defunct university academic hall on the site, called White Hall.
[29] The buildings that now surround the first quadrangle were erected in stages between 1571 and the 1620s; the principal's lodgings were the last to be built.
Progress was slow because the new college lacked the "generous endowments" that earlier colleges enjoyed.
[30] Before new buildings were completed, the students lived in the old buildings of White Hall.
[31]
First quadrangle
The chapel was dedicated on 28 May 1621, and extended in 1636.
[32] The architectural historian Giles Worsley has described the chapel's east window (added in 1636) as an instance of Gothic Revival architecture, rather than Gothic Survival, since a choice was made to use an outdated style – classical architecture had become accepted as "the only style in which it was respectable to build".
[33] Jonathan Edwards (principal from 1686 to 1712) is reported to have spent £1,000 (approximately £ in present day terms) during his lifetime on the interior of the chapel, including the addition of a screen separating the main part of the chapel from the ante-chapel (at the west end) in 1693.
In 1853, stained glass by George Hedgeland was added to the east window.
In 1863, the architect George Edmund Street was appointed to renovate the chapel.
The arch of the chancel was widened, the original Jacobean woodwork was removed (save for the screen donated by Edwards and the pulpit), new seats were installed, new paving was placed in the main part of the chapel and a stone reredos was added behind the altar.
[34] [35] Views of the changes have differed.
On 21 October 1864, Building News reported that the restoration was nearing completion and was of "a very spirited character".
It said that the new "handsome" arch showed the east window "to great advantage", with "other improvements" including a "handsome reredos".
[34] Ernest Hardy , principal from 1921 to 1925, said that the work was "ill-considered", described the reredos as "somewhat tawdry" and said that the Jacobean woodwork had been sold off too cheaply.
[36] In contrast, the architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner called the reredos "heavily gorgeous".
[37]
The principal of the college resides in the lodgings, a Grade I listed building, [38] on the north side of the first quadrangle between the chapel (to the east) and the hall (to the west).
They were the last part of the first quadrangle to be built.
[39] Sir Eubule Thelwall, principal from 1621 to 1630, built the lodgings at his own expense, to include (in the words of the antiquarian Anthony Wood ) "a very fair dining-room adorned with wainscot curiously engraven".
[40] The shell-hood over the doorway (which Pevsner called "beautiful") [37] was added at some point between 1670 and 1740; Pevsner dates it to about 1700.
[36] [37]
The hall has been said to be "among the most impressive of all the Oxford college halls", with its "fine panelling, austere ceiling, and its notable paintings".
[41] Like the chapel, it was largely built by Griffith Powell between 1613 and 1620, and was finally completed soon after his death in 1620.
[39] Pevsner noted the "elaborately decorated columns" of the screen (installed in 1634) and the dragons along the frieze, and said that it was one of the earliest examples in Oxford of panelling using four "L" shapes around a centre.
[32] [42] In 1741 and 1742, the oak-beamed roof was covered with plaster to make rooms in the roof space.
[43] [44] Pevsner described the 1741 cartouche on the north wall, which contains the college crest, as "large [and] rich".
The hall contains a portrait of Elizabeth I, as well as portraits of former principals and benefactors.
[45] There are also portraits by court artists of two other monarchs who were college benefactors: Charles I (by Anthony van Dyck ) and Charles II (by Sir Peter Lely ).
[46]
Second quadrangle
In 1640, Francis Mansell (appointed principal in 1630) began construction of a second quadrangle with buildings along the north and south sides; further work was interrupted by the English Civil War .
[47] [48] Work began again in 1676, and the library (now the Fellows' Library) was completed by 1679.
[49] [50] Under Jonathan Edwards (principal from 1688 to 1712), further rooms were built to complete the quadrangle; the project was completed just after his death in 1712.
[49] Pevsner described the second quadrangle as "a uniform composition", noting the "regular fenestration by windows with round-arched lights, their hood-moulds forming a continuous frieze".
[51] The Dutch gables have ogee sides and semi-circular pediments .
[51] The writer Simon Jenkins said that the quadrangle has "the familiar Oxford Tudor windows and decorative Dutch gables, crowding the skyline like Welsh dragons' teeth and lightened by exuberant flower boxes".
[52]
The Fellows' Library contains bookcases decorated with strapwork dating from about 1628, which were used in an earlier library in the college.
[51] Hardy's opinion was that, "if only it had an open timber roof instead of the plain ceiling, it would be one of the most picturesque College Libraries".
[36] [53] Another author said (in 1914, after the provision of a library for undergraduates elsewhere in the quadrangle) that it was "one of the most charming of Oxford libraries, and one of the least frequented".
[54] It holds 11,000 antiquarian printed books and houses many of the college's rare texts, including a Greek bible dating from 1545 and signed by Philipp Melanchthon and others, much of the library of the scholar and philosopher Lord Herbert of Cherbury and 17th-century volumes by Robert Boyle and Sir Isaac Newton .
[55] [56]
Third quadrangle
The long but narrow third quadrangle adjoins Ship Street, on the north of the site and to the west of the garden of the principal's lodgings, where the college has owned some land since its foundation.
In the 18th century, this was home to the college stables.
A fire in 1904 led to the demolition of the stables and the gateway to Ship Street.
[57] Replacement buildings adjoining Ship Street, effectively creating a third quadrangle for the college, were constructed between 1906 and 1908.
[58] It contained the college's science laboratories (now closed) and a new gate-tower, as well as further living accommodation and a library for students, known as the Meyricke Library, after a major donor – there had been an undergraduate library in the second quadrangle since 1865, known as the Meyricke Library from 1882 onwards.
[57] [58]
The Old Members' Building, which contains a music room, 24 study-bedrooms and some lecture rooms, was built between 1969 and 1971.
[51] [59] It was built after a fundraising appeal to Old Members to mark the college's quatercentenary, and was opened by the Prince of Wales in 1971.
[60] The Fellows' Garden is between the Old Members' Building and the rear of the rooms on the west side of the second quadrangle.
In 2002, a two-year project to rebuild the property above the college-owned shops on Ship Street was completed.
As part of the work, the bottom floor was converted from rooms occupied by students and fellows into a new Junior Common Room (JCR), to replace the common room in the second quadrangle, which was by then too small to cope with the increased numbers of students.
[61]
Other buildings
The college purchased 10acres of land in east Oxford (near the Cowley Road ) in 1903 for use as a sports ground.
Residential accommodation was first built at the sports ground in 1967 (Thelwall House, rebuilt in 1998), with additions between 1988 and 1990 (Hugh Price House and Leoline Jenkins House).
A further development, known as Hazel Court (after Alfred Hazel , principal 1925–1944), was built in 2000, bringing the total number of students who can be housed at the sports ground to 135.
[62]
Donations from Edwin Stevens , an Old Member of the college, enabled the construction in 1974 of student flats at a site in north Oxford on the Woodstock Road , named "Stevens Close" in his honour.
[63] The college also owns a number of houses on Ship Street, which are used for student accommodation.
[64] It has purchased a further site in Ship Street at a cost of £1.8M, which will be converted at a projected cost of £5.5M to provide 31 student rooms with en-suite facilities, a 100-seat lecture theatre and other teaching rooms.
[65] [66] The Ship Street Centre was officially opened by the Chancellor of the University of Oxford, Lord Patten of Barnes , on 25 September 2010.
[67]
People associated with the college
Principals and Fellows
See main article: List of Principals and Fellows of Jesus College, Oxford .
The college is run by the Principal and Fellow s.
The Principal must be "a person distinguished for literary or scientific attainments, or for services in the work of education in the University or elsewhere".
[68] The Principal has "pre-eminence and authority over all members of the College and all persons connected therewith" and exercises "a general superintendence in all matters relating to education and discipline".
[69] The current Principal, Sir Nigel Shadbolt , was appointed in 2015.
[70] Fourteen Principals have been former students of the college: Griffith Powell (elected in 1613) was the first and Alfred Hazel (elected in 1925) was the most recent.
The longest-serving principal was Henry Foulkes , from 1817 to 1857.
[71]
When the college was founded in 1571, the first charter installed David Lewis as Principal and named eight others as the first Fellows of the college.
[72] The statutes of 1622 allowed for 16 Fellows.
[13] There is now no limit on the number of Fellowships that the Governing Body can create.
[73] The college statutes provide for various categories of Fellows.
[74] Professorial Fellows are those Professor s and Readers of the University who are allocated to the college by the University.
[75] One of these professorships is the Jesus Professor of Celtic , which is the only chair in Celtic Studies at an English university.
Celtic scholars such as Sir John Rhys and Ellis Evans have held the position since its creation in 1877.
[76] The chair is currently vacant, having been held by Thomas Charles-Edwards until his retirement in 2011.
[77] [78] The zoologists Charles Godfray and Paul Harvey are both Professorial Fellows.
[79] [80] Official Fellows are those who hold tutorial or administrative appointments in the college.
Past Official Fellows include the composer and musicologist John Caldwell , the historians Sir Goronwy Edwards and Niall Ferguson , the philosopher Galen Strawson and the political philosopher John Gray .
[81] [82] [83] [84] [85] There are also Senior and Junior Research Fellows.
Principals and Fellows who retire can be elected as Emeritus Fellows.
[74]
A further category is that of Welsh Supernumerary Fellows, who are, in rotation, the Vice-Chancellors of Cardiff University , Swansea University , Lampeter University , Aberystwyth University , Bangor University and the University of Wales College of Medicine .
[74] There is one Welsh Supernumerary Fellow at a time, holding the position for not longer than three years.
[86] The first of these was John Viriamu Jones in 1897.
[87]
The college formerly had a category of missionary Fellows, known as Leoline Fellows after their founder, Leoline Jenkins (a former principal).
In his will in 1685, he stated that "It is but too obvious that the persons in Holy Orders employed in his Majesty's fleet at sea and foreign plantations are too few."
To address this, he established two Fellowships at Jesus College, whose holders should serve as clergy "in any of his Majesty's fleets or in his Majesty's plantations" under the direction of the Lord High Admiral and the Bishop of London respectively.
The last of these, Frederick de Winton , was appointed in 1876 and held his Fellowship until his death in 1932.
This category was abolished in 1877 by the Oxford and Cambridge Universities Commission, without prejudice to the rights of existing holders such as de Winton.
[88] Another category of Fellowship that was abolished in the 19th century was that of the King Charles I Fellows, founded by King Charles in 1636 and tenable by natives of the Channel Islands in an attempt by him to "reclaim the Channel Islands from the extreme Calvinism which characterised them."
[89] The first such Fellow was Daniel Brevint .
[89]
Honorary Fellows
See main article: List of Honorary Fellows of Jesus College, Oxford .
The Governing Body has the ability to elect "distinguished persons" to Honorary Fellowships.
[90] Under the current statutes of the college, Honorary Fellows cannot vote at meetings of the Governing Body and do not receive financial reward.
[90] They can be called upon, however, to help decide whether to dismiss or discipline members of academic staff (including the Principal).
[91]
All but one of the Honorary Fellows – the journalist and broadcaster Francine Stock  – have been men.
[92] Three former Principals of the College ( John Christie , Sir John Habakkuk and Sir Peter North ) have been elected Honorary Fellows on retirement.
[93] [94] [95] Some Honorary Fellows were formerly Fellows of the college, others were Old Members of the college, and some were in both categories.
Others had no previous academic connection with the college before their election.
Some of these were distinguished Welshmen – for example, the Welsh businessman Sir Alfred Jones was elected in 1902 and the Welsh judge Sir Samuel Evans , President of the Probate, Divorce and Admiralty Division of the High Court , was elected in 1918.
[96] [97] The Welsh politician David Lloyd George was elected to an Honorary Fellowship in 1910 when he was Chancellor of the Exchequer .
He wrote to Sir John Rhys, the Principal at the time, to thank the college for the honour, saying:
The first three Honorary Fellows, all former students of the college, were elected in October 1877: John Rhys, the first Jesus Professor of Celtic (later an Official Fellow (1881–1895) and Principal (1895–1915)); the historian John Richard Green ; and the poet Lewis Morris .
[98] The college noted in 1998 that the number of Honorary Fellows of the college was markedly below the average of other Oxford colleges and it adopted a more methodical approach to increase numbers.
[99] Seven Honorary Fellows were elected that year, followed by another five in 1999.
The college's Honorary Fellows have included two Old Members who later became Prime Minister of their respective countries: Norman Washington Manley , who studied at Jesus College as a Rhodes Scholar and who was Chief Minister of Jamaica from 1955 to 1962, and Harold Wilson, who was twice British Prime Minister (1964–1970 and 1974–1976).
[100] [101] As of March 2010, the longest-serving Honorary Fellow is Anatole Abragam , who was elected in 1976.
[102]
Alumni
See main article: List of alumni of Jesus College, Oxford , List of alumni of Jesus College, Oxford: Clergy , List of alumni of Jesus College, Oxford: Law and government and List of alumni of Jesus College, Oxford: Mathematics, medicine and science .
Notable former students of the college have included politicians, scientists, writers, entertainers and academics.
T. E. Lawrence ("Lawrence of Arabia"), known for his part in the Arab Revolt of 1916–1918 and for his writings including Seven Pillars of Wisdom , studied history at the college.
His thesis on Crusader castles (the fieldwork for which marked the beginning of his fascination with the Middle East ) is held in the Fellows' Library.
[103] Other former students include Pixley ka Isaka Seme (a founder and president of the African National Congress ), Sir William Williams ( Speaker of the House of Commons 1680–1685), and Lord Sankey ( Lord Chancellor 1929–1935).
[104] Members of Parliament from the three main political parties in the United Kingdom have attended the college, as have politicians from Australia ( Neal Blewett ), [105] New Zealand ( Harold Rushworth ), Sri Lanka ( Lalith Athulathmudali ) [106] and the United States ( Heather Wilson ).
[107]
The founders' hopes that their college would produce prominent Welsh clergy were fulfilled in no small measure when a former student, Alfred George Edwards , was elected the first Archbishop of Wales when the Church in Wales was disestablished in 1920.
[108] Two later Archbishops of Wales, Glyn Simon (Archbishop from 1968 to 1971) and Gwilym Owen Williams (Archbishop 1971–1982) were also educated at the college.
[104] Celticists associated with the college include Sir John Rhys, [109] Sir John Morris-Jones , [110] and Sir Thomas (T. H.) Parry-Williams , [111] whilst the list of historians includes the college's first graduate, David Powel , who published the first printed history of Wales in 1584, [112] and the Victorian historian J. R. Green .
[113] Angus Buchanan won the Victoria Cross during the First World War.
[114] Record-breaking quadriplegic solo sailor Hilary Lister was also a student here, [115] whilst from the field of arts and entertainment there are names such as Magnus Magnusson , presenter of Mastermind , [104] the National Poet of Wales Gwyn Thomas , [116] and television weather presenters Kirsty McCabe and Siân Lloyd .
[104] [117] Nigel Hitchin , the Savilian Professor of Geometry at Oxford since 1997, studied at the college, [118] as did Edward Hinds (a physicist who won the Rumford Medal in 2008), [119] Chris Rapley (director of the Science Museum ), [120] and the zoologists Edward Bagnall Poulton and James Brontë Gatenby .
[104]
Student life
There are about 325 undergraduates and 150 postgraduates.
About half of the undergraduates studied at state schools before coming to Oxford, and about 10% are from overseas.
Students from the college participate in a variety of extracurricular activities.
Some contribute to student journalism for Cherwell or The Oxford Student .
The Turl Street Arts Festival (a week-long student-organised event) is held annually in conjunction with the two other colleges on Turl Street, Exeter and Lincoln colleges.
The festival, which takes place in Fifth Week of Hilary term , includes exhibitions, plays and concerts.
Although the college does not award choral scholar ships, the chapel choir is well-attended by college members and others.
The choir is non-auditioning for college members, and is run by one or more undergraduate organ scholar s.
Sports
See main article: Jesus College Boat Club (Oxford) .
In common with many Oxford colleges, Jesus provides sporting facilities for students, including playing fields at a site in east Oxford off the Cowley Road known as Bartlemas (for its proximity to St Bartholomew's Chapel ).
Football, rugby, netball, field hockey, cricket, and tennis can be played there.
Squash courts are at a separate city-centre site on St Cross Road .
The college also provides students with membership of the university's gym and swimming pool on Iffley Road .
[121]
Jesus College Boat Club (commonly abbreviated to JCBC) is the rowing club for members of the college.
The club was formed in 1835, but rowing at the college predates the foundation of the club: a boat from the college was involved in the earliest recorded races between college crews at Oxford in 1815, when it competed against a crew from Brasenose College .
[122] These may have been the only two colleges who had boats racing at that time, and the Brasenose boat was usually victorious.
[123] Neither the men's nor the women's 1st VIIIs have been "Head of the River" during Eights Week , the main college races, but the women's 1st VIII was Head of the River in the spring races, Torpids , between 1980 and 1983.
[124] [125] [126] [127] Jesus boats have also had other successful seasons: the 1896 Jesus College boat had a reputation of being one of the faster boats in the university, [128] and the women's 1st VIII of 1993 won their "blades" in the first divisions of both Torpids and Eights Week, an achievement that led to the crew being described in the Jesus College Record as vying "not just for the College team of the decade, but perhaps for the team of the last three decades", in any sport.
[129]