Mar
APR
May
21
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
21 Apr 16 - 21 Apr 16
Close Help
Log In   |   Join
Find more than 2 million places in the U.S.
Capon Chapel, West Virginia
Main
Map
What's Nearby
Comments
Photos
News
Websites
Submit
Map & Aerial Image
Capon Chapel map, photos, satellite view and comments.
Capon Chapel is a Church in Hampshire County, WV with an elevation of 869 feet, or 265 meters above sea level.
This place is also known as  Capon Baptist Chapel and Capon Chapel Church.
A satellite image of the Capon Chapel area in Hampshire County, WV.
Click the map image to see more detail and to pan and zoom.
What's Nearby Capon Chapel
Capon Chapel 0.00 miles away
A Church in Hampshire, West Virginia
Capon Chapel Cemetery 0.03 miles away
A Cemetery in Hampshire, West Virginia
Camp White Rock 0.57 miles away
A Locale in Hampshire, West Virginia
Glenwood School (historical) 0.79 miles away
A School in Hampshire, West Virginia
Kale Hollow 1.23 miles away
A Valley in Hampshire, West Virginia
Bubbling Spring 1.28 miles away
A Spring in Hampshire, West Virginia
Bubbling Spring 1.30 miles away
A Populated Place in Hampshire, West Virginia
Daisy Baker Spring 1.34 miles away
A Spring in Hampshire, West Virginia
Old Man Run 1.41 miles away
A Stream in Hampshire, West Virginia
Mill Branch 1.46 miles away
A Stream in Hampshire, West Virginia
Ever been to Capon Chapel in West Virginia?
Share your story on Placekeeper .
Tell us about this place, what it's like, how you get there or just share a great memory.
New!
Get email alerts for this location.
Email:
Submit
Photos    View all photos associated with this place | Submit a photo
Capon Chapel, West Virginia in the News
Irene Rella Carpenter
Irene was born October 18, 1930 in Webster Springs, West Virginia, to Willie and Clora (Thomas ... Carpenter of Cornish New Hampshire, Susan (Mark) Faunce and son-in-law, Steve Ramsier of Millersburg; 11 grandchildren; 17 great-grandchildren.
Guest captures ghostly figure in 'Shining' hotel
Explore Southern History writes that freed Southern slave Henry Wells was accused of burning the Pickens County Courthouse ... in the The Old Chapel House.
In its 100 years of operating, the Moundsville Penitentiary in West Virginia killed over 1,000 ...
Reverend Dr. Visser, Raja to address Class of 2016
Baccalaureate services will be held in Roberts Chapel at 11 a.m., and Commencement will be ... He has been the minister for several churches in Pennsylvania, West Virginia, New Hampshire and Maine, serving at the First Baptist Church in Waynesburg ...
Why Fort Edwards celebrates a colonial feast each April
There was no Capon Bridge then, no bridge at all, and the river was spelled “Cacapehon.”
Edwards had been “well off” in Chester County, near Philadelphia ... Governor Dinwiddie of the Virginia Colony requested and got military aid from King ...
Robin Burkhart Obituary
Robin Dawn Knotts Burkhart, 42, of Hampshire County ... Amherst Chapel.
Memorial contributions, a trust fund for Robin's children, may be made to Bank of Romney, c/o Kevin Burkhart, Capon Bridge Branch, P.O. Box 214, Capon Bridge, West Virginia 26711.
Related Websites    View all websites associated with this place
Capon Chapel - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Capon_Chapel
North and west sides of Capon Chapel viewed from the ... According to historians Hu Maxwell and Howard Llewellyn Swisher in History of Hampshire County, West Virginia ...
Capon Chapel Cemetery of Hampshire County, WV
www.historichampshire.org/cems/capon.htm
Capon Chapel Cemetery, Capon Bridge, WV.
... Virginia Nixon Crim: ... died Aug 14, 1967; "West Va.
Pvt. 3 Bonets & GNR RG SQ AAF WWII".
John Seldon: born Dec 26, ...
Capon Chapel - sharefaith.com
www.sharefaith.com/.../hampshire-county/capon-chapel.html
Find information on Capon Chapel of Hampshire, West Virginia offered as part of our growing nationwide Christian church and resource directory, including the feedback ...
Capon Chapel Of The Brethren Romney WV - Church Finder
www.churchfinder.com/churches/wv/romney/capon-chapel-brethren
Capon Chapel Of The Brethren is a Christian church in Romney West Virginia.
This Brethren church serves Hampshire County WV
Find A Grave: Capon Chapel Cemetery
www.findagrave.com/cgi-bin/fg.cgi?page=cr&CRid=77947
Capon Bridge Hampshire County West Virginia USA: Search Capon Chapel Cemetery: First Name: Last Name: Links • View all interments (370) • 68% photographed.
Recent comments on Capon Chapel
Read all comments on this place | Submit a comment
Sorry, no comments submitted for this location.
Have you ever been to Capon Chapel?
Share your story about this location, it only takes a few seconds.
Any comment will be appreciated by other fans of this place.
Get the discussion started.
Place Type
Capon Chapel is a Church.
Definition: Building used for religious worship (chapel, mosque, synagogue, tabernacle, temple).
Latitude and Longitude:
Latitude: 39.2698239
Longitude: -78.4444521
© Copyright 2014 Future Works LLC  |   Terms of Use   |   Privacy Policy
Time to build:  0.0000 seconds at 09:12 AM Apr. 21, 2016