Under Beirut's Rubble, Remnants of 5,000 Years of Civilization
By DOUGLAS JEHL
Published: February 23, 1997
BEIRUT, Lebanon, Feb. 22— Archeologists digging beneath the war rubble of central Beirut have found the remains of nearly 5,000 years of successive civilizations.
The excavations, done as part of a major effort to rebuild the city center after the devastating civil war, are the largest ever undertaken here, and they have confirmed a long-held belief that Beirut was founded as early as 3,000 B.C., before Jerusalem, Athens, Damascus, or any other current capital.
In a vast area where hundreds of buildings demolished during the 1975-1990 civil war have now been razed, archeologists have uncovered layers of Canaanite, Phoenician, Hellenistic, Roman and Ottoman civilization.
Much of the area is soon to be transformed into a futuristic complex by Solidere, the company that is rebuilding central Beirut.
Only a few of the ancient remains are to be preserved in place, prompting criticism from people who fear that Lebanon is giving short shrift to its archeological heritage.
But most of the $8 million cost of the renovation has been financed by Solidere, and archeologists associated with the project say they are confident that the most important artifacts will be preserved even as planners rush to give the city a face-lift.
''We are living in the heart of Beirut, and you cannot let the heart die because of archeology,'' said Hareth al-Boustani, a professor of the history of architecture at the Lebanese University who is an adviser to Solidere. ''
Civilizations are intertwined, and we don't have the right to cut the link between ourselves and the older civilizations.''
The excavations, which began in 1993, have uncovered some 860,000 square feet, about one-twentieth of the area under development by Solidere, and have been carried out by teams that have included scientists from France, Italy, Germany and the Czech Republic.
All of the work has been finished except for a continuing effort to uncover remnants of the Law School of Berytus, described in Roman, Byzantine and Arabic texts as the most prominent in the Roman Empire before Beirut was destroyed by an earthquake in A.D. 551.
Mr. Boustani, 52, was part of a Lebanese team that began an excavation project during a lull in the civil war in 1977 but had to set it aside for 17 years after the fighting resumed.
The discovery of the Law School would be a major find, he said, but what has been unveiled so far, while less notable, is also important.
''This is ancient Beirut's premiere in the modern world,'' Mr. Boustani said.
In ancient Byblos, now known as Jbeil, 30 miles north of Beirut, Lebanon already claims to be the home of the oldest city in the world, continuously inhabited for 7,000 years.
And Baalbek, in the Bekaa region, boasts colossal Roman ruins including the Temple of Jupiter, whose six remaining stone columns are each 65 feet high.
To these and other ruins, the Lebanese authorities now intend to add for public display at least parts of the six new sites in Beirut deemed worthy of preservation, including a Canaanite hill and a Phoenician quarter that will be left entirely in place.
Three other sites -- a Hellenistic quarter, a Byzantine commercial site and some Roman ruins -- are to be dismantled and rebuilt, while the Cardomaximus, the main north-south street of Roman Beirut, is to be repaired and preserved.
Some 27,000 square feet of mosaics found in excavations are to be installed in traditional souks, or covered markets, scheduled to be built as part of the project next year.