MAR
MAY
AUG
11
2015
2016
2017
89 captures
6 May 00 - 26 Aug 16
Close Help
Beritus (Berytus) Nutris Legum (Beirut Mother of Law), Roman School of Law
 
en.wikipedia is is a non-peer-reviewed website with   agenda and is anti-Lebanese & anti-Semitic 
 
2000                 pages, Web's Largest Phoenician Site     
Enable Flash to translate this page
Simulation of the cataclysm that destroyed the Berytus School of Law:
Click on the button          below to experience the last days of Berytus Nutris Legum!
Beritus (Berytus) Nutris Legum (Beirut Mother of Law)
Towards the middle of the third century after Christ a school of law  and jurisprudence arose at Berytus, which attained high distinction,  and is said by Gibbon to have furnished the eastern provinces of  the empire with pleaders and magistrates for the space of three  centuries (A.D. 250-550). The course of education at Berytus lasted  five years, and included Roman Law in all its various forms, the works  of Papinian being especially studied in the earlier times, and the  same together with the edicts of Justinian in the later. Pleaders  were forced to study either at Berytus, or at Rome, or at  Constantinople, and, the honours and emoluments of the profession  being large, the supply of students was abundant and perpetual. External misfortune, and not internal decay, at last destroyed the  school, the town of Berytus being completely demolished by an  earthquake in the year A.D. 551. The school was then transferred to  Sidon, but appears to have languished on its transplantation to a new  soil and never to have recovered its pristine vigour or vitality.
In many respects,      one of the most important cities of Phoenicia during the time of the Roman      Empire was Berytus. It became the seat of the most famous provincial school      of Roman law. The school, which probably was founded by Septimius Severus,      lasted until the destruction of Berytus itself by a sequence of earthquakes,      tidal wave, and fire in the mid-6th century. Two of Rome's most famous jurists,      Papinian and Ulpian, both natives of Phoenicia, taught as professors at the      law school under the Severans. Their judicial opinions constitute well over      a third of the Pandects (Digest) contained in the great compilation of Roman      law commissioned by the emperor Justinian I in the 6th century AD.
Two great enterprises       had substantially despatched Justinian’s     work; however, he, or rather Tribonian, who seems to have acted both as his     adviser and as his chief executive officer in all legal affairs, conceived     that a third book was needed, viz. An elementary manual for beginners which     should present an outline of the law in a clear and simple form. The little     work of Gaius, most of which we now possess under the title of Commentarii     institutionum, had served this purpose for nearly four centuries; but     much of it had, owing to changes in the law, become inapplicable, so that     a new     manual seemed to be required. Justinian accordingly directed Tribonian, with     two coadjutors, Theophilus, professor of law in the university of Constantinople,     and Dorotheus, professor in the great law school at Berytus, to prepare     an elementary textbook on the lines of Gaius. This they did while the Digest     was in progress, and produced the useful little treatise which has ever since     been the book with which students commonly begin their studies of Roman law,     the Institutes of Justinian. It was published as a statute with     full legal validity shortly before the Digest. Such merits as it possesses – simplicity     of arrangement, clearness and conciseness of expression – belong less     to Tribonian than to Gaius, who was closely followed wherever the alterations     in the law had not made him obsolete. However, the spirit of that great legal     classic seems to have in a measure dwelt with and inspired the inferior men     who were recasting his work, the Institutes is better both in Latinity and     in substance than we should have expected from condition of Latin letters     at that epoch, better than the other laws which emanate from Justinian.
Papinian,    Jurist
Latin in full AEMILIUS PAPINIANUS (b. c. AD 140 -- d. 212), Phoenician Roman jurist      who posthumously became the definitive authority on Roman law, possibly because      his moral highmindedness was congenial to the worldview of the Christian rulers      of the postclassical empire.
Papinian held      high public office under the emperor Lucius Septimius Severus (reigned AD      193-211) and was the best known of the Roman prefects. He was killed at the      order of Severus' son and successor, Caracalla, perhaps for refusing to supply      a legal excuse for the new emperor's murder of his brother and political rival,      Geta.
The most important      of Papinian's works are two collections of cases: Quaestiones (37 books)      and Responsa (19 books) Definitiones (2 books), and De adulteriis (2 books), attained the highest authority and are regarded today as among      the principal Roman contributions to the foundation of modern law. In the      postclassical law schools, the third-year students, who were called Papinianistae,      used the Responsa as the basis of the curriculum. The Law of Citations      (AD 426) of the emperor Theodosius II made Papinian predominant among five      classical jurists whose works were to be authoritative in legal proceedings.      His books were written in precise and elegant Latin.
Ulpian,    Jurist
Latin in full DOMITIUS ULPIANUS (b. Tyre, Phoenicia--d. AD 228), Phoenician Roman      jurist and imperial official whose writings supplied one-third of the total      content of the Byzantine emperor Justinian I's monumental Digest, or Pandects      (completed 533). He was a subordinate to Papinian when that older jurist was      praetorian prefect (chief adviser to the emperor and commander of his bodyguard)      under Lucius Septimius Severus (reigned 193-211), and he annotated Papinian's      works. Afterward Ulpian was master of petitions to the emperor Caracalla,      and under Severus Alexander he served as praetorian prefect from 222 until      228, when he was murdered by officers in his command.
Ulpian wrote      prolifically on law in a clear, elegant style. Like Papinian, he was an intelligent      editor and interpreter of existing ideas rather than an original legal thinker,      such as Marcus Antistius Labeo. His major works are the commentaries Libri      ad Sabinum (51 books interpreting the civil law; incomplete) and Libri      ad edictum (81 books concerning praetorian edicts). Justinian's compilers,      headed by Tribonian, drew heavily on these and other treatises and monographs      by Ulpian. A work variously called Tituli ex corpore Ulpiani, Epitome Ulpiani,      or Regulae Ulpiani is no longer believed to be his.
Dorotheus,    Jurist and Professor of Roman Law
Dorotheus (first      half of the 6th century AD), jurist, was one of the principal codifiers of      Roman law under the emperor Justinian I.
Dorotheus helped      to compile the Digest, or Pandects (published in 533), and the second edition      of the Codex Constitutionum (published in 534). With Tribonian (Tribonianus),      head of the Digest's compilers, and Theophilus, he also prepared the Institutes (533) as an introduction to the Digest. Fragments of his Index (542), a commentary      on the Digest, are preserved in the 9th-century law code called the Basilica.      Dorotheus taught jurisprudence in the school of Roman law at Berytus at      that time probably the best law school in the eastern Roman Empire.
Sources: Please see Bibliography (link below)
DISCLAIMER:                 Opinions expressed                  in this site do not necessarily represent Phoenicia.org nor do they necessarily reflect those  of the various authors, editors, and owner of this site. Consequently,  parties mentioned or implied cannot be held liable or responsible for such opinions.
Additional references,               sources and bibliography
Home
Green live online
Red visited today.
©
Copyright , All                      rights reserved by original referenced materials and the author: http://phoenicia.org © Phoenician Canaanite Encyclopedia -- © Phoenician Encyclopedia -- © Punic Encyclopedia -- © Canaanite Encyclopedia -- © Encyclopedia                     Phoeniciana, Encyclopedia Punica, Encyclopedia Canaanitica.  
Use of materials from this site are not allowed without written permission and must hyperlink back to http://phoenicia.org
The material in this website was researched, compiled, & designed by Salim George Khalaf, site owner, author & editor.
© Copyright, Declared and implied copyright laws must be observed always for text or graphics in compliance with international and domestic laws.
This site has been online for nearly 20 years.
Contact:
Salim George Khalaf , Byzantine Phoenician Descendent
Salim is from Shalim, Phoenician god of dusk, whose place was Urushalim/Jerusalem
"A Bequest Unearthed, Phoenicia" — Encyclopedia Phoeniciana