Reburial of Richard III
Our plans for the reburial (reinterment) of King Richard III have been carefully thought through and developed over the past year by our team at Leicester Cathedral.  We have drawn on a wide range of expert knowledge and advice, but above all have been guided by our Christian perspective on life, death and what lies beyond.   It is only responsible of us to have these plans ready, so that we can be in a position to lay this English monarch properly to rest as soon as possible after Judicial Review permits it, and without further undue delay.

Richard was buried back in 1485.  The ceremony took place almost certainly on 25 August, on the orders of the now King Henry VII, who we might imagine was anxious to leave Leicester and consolidate his new royal status.   Richard’s body had been exhibited to public gaze for three days, to prove beyond doubt his death, and now it needed to be laid speedily to rest, and probably in a manner and place that would attract as little attention as possible.  Hence the choir of Greyfriars Abbey, a place where we believe only friars would normally go.   But we can be sure that however hasty the burial, funeral prayers would have been said, and prayer would, of course continue to be offered daily in the very place he was laid.

In Christian tradition bodies are always buried with the presumption of finality – even if, on occasion, they may need to be moved and reburied.  If that has to take place, proper practice presumes reburial in the nearest consecrated ground.  Greyfriars and St Martins church were immediate neighbours in 1485, and St Martins, now a Cathedral, is now the nearest place for reburial.  It is also the place specified in the Exhumation Licence, and requested by the University.  You can read the letter asking for this here.

Our draft reburial plans will involve a series of particular ‘moments’, which are to be spread out over several days starting on Sunday 22 March with the reinterment itself on Thursday 26 March.
Reception

The remains of King Richard III will be placed in a coffin in the University, and brought from there to the Cathedral in a dignified manner, with a public route that will reflect the movements of his final days.

The coffin will arrive in the wonderful setting of the new Cathedral Gardens, marked with the relocated statue of the king with sword in hand, and the exciting new sculpture telling the story of his Bosworth defeat, death, burial and rediscovery.  From there it will proceed into the Cathedral where it will be formally received in the setting of the medieval service of Compline.
Repose

The coffin will then lie at rest for a number of days, covered with a magnificent specially commissioned pall, which tells in pictures something of Richard’s personal story, and the public will be given the opportunity to visit and pay their respects to this one-time King of England.

The Cathedral’s regular daily prayers over this period will gain a special force and meaning, as they are said in the light of this significant moment in our history.
Reburial

The reburial itself will be the occasion of a special service, which will draw together all we know of medieval reinterment rites, but will also clearly be intelligible for a modern 21st century global audience.  This will not be a funeral service, when the departed is clearly commended into the hands of God in the presence of those who knew them personally in life, because this has already taken place.   It will involve prayers in memory both of Richard and of all who died at Bosworth and in warfare, and will commend his soul afresh to God’s merciful judgement.

At the culmination of this service the coffin will be lowered below ground into the specially designed tomb, in a place within the Cathedral closely corresponding to where he was placed in Greyfriars over five centuries ago.
Reveal

The following day there will be a service looking to the future, as the tomb in its fullness will be revealed for the first time.  Overnight the massive stone top marking the sealing off of the grave-space will have been lowered into place.  Inscribed with a cross, it will face towards the Cathedral’s magnificent east window depicting Christ the King coming in victory at the last.

The Cathedral church of Leicester and Leicestershire will then invite its many communities to join us as we celebrate this permanent resting place for the last of the Plantagenets, and all that this means for the story we tell every day into the future.