See other formats
LYNDON LAROUCHE AND THE NEW  AMERICAN FASCISM   Revised online HTML edition, 2007.
Copyriglit © by William Dennis King,  1989.
Revisions copyright © by William  Dennis King, 2007.
This is the entire book  in HTML, including chapter references.
"It is not necessary to wear brown shirts to be a  fascist.
.
.
.
It is not necessary to wear a swastika to be a  fascist.
.
.
.
It is not necessary to call oneself a fascist to  be a fascist.
It is simply necessary to be one!
--Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., "Solving the  Machiavellian Problem Today," New  So//c/ar/Yy, July 7, 1978     INTRODUCTION   PART ONE: The Vanguard   ONE: Makings of an Ideologue   TWO: Do You Believe in Marxist Magic?
THREE: Operation Mop Up   FOUR: The Great Manchurian Candidate Scare   FIVE: The Beethoven Gang   SIX: The Jewish Question   PART TWO: What LaRouche Wants   SEVEN: The Grand Design   PART THREE: LaRouche and Star Wars   EIGHT: The Greatest Invention Since Fire  NINE: The "Higher" Peace Movement  TEN: Old Nazis and New Dreams   PART FOUR: Building a Movement   ELEVEN: More American Than Apple Pie  TWELVE: The Gotterdammercrats  THIRTEEN: Tanks Down State Street  FOURTEEN: After Illinois   FIFTEEN: LaRouche and the Reagan Revolution  SIXTEEN: The Art of Scapegoating  SEVENTEEN: Get Kissinger!
PART FIVE: LaRouche's Private CIA   EIGHTEEN: The Billion-Dollar Brain  NINETEEN: Intrigue on Five Continents  TWENTY: The Wooing of Lanqlev  TWENTY-ONE: Night Riders to the Rescue  TWENTY-TWO: Join the Spooks and Stay Out of Jail   PART SIX: The Security Staff   TWENTY-THREE: The School of Dirty Tricks  TWENTY-FOUR: Law and Order, LaRouche Style  TWENTY-FIVE: An Agent of Chaos  TWENTY-SIX: To Roy Cohn, with Love   PART SEVEN: Conspiracies and Code Words   TWENTY-SEVEN: LaRouche's Purloined Letter  TWENTY-EIGHT: Babylonians Under Every Bed  TWENTY-NINE: Elizabeth, Queen of the Jews  THIRTY: The War Between the Species   PART EIGHT: LaRouche, Inc.: The Tycoon   THIRTY-ONE: The Root of All Evil   THIRTY-TWO: The Shell Game   THIRTY-THREE: The World's Most Expensive Glass of Sherry   PART NINE: LaRouche, Inc.: The Underworld  Connection     THIRTY-FOUR: The War on Drugs, So Called   THIRTY-FIVE: Las Vegas in the Sky   THIRTY-SIX: Fishing for Piranhas   THIRTY-SEVEN: How to Win Friends and Influence Hoodlums   THIRTY-EIGHT: Senators, Cabinet Members, and Dictators   AFTERWORD: Why LaRouche Was Not Fought  Dedication and Acknowledgements  Ciiapter References     Introduction     In the mid-1970s a former Trotskyist named Lyndon LaRouche emerged from the  wreckage of the New Left with a few hundred young followers in tow.
Claiming to  have "subsumed" Marxism, he announced that henceforth he and his associates  would champion the industrial capitalists rather than the proletariat.
Organizers  for his National Caucus of Labor Committees (NCLC) began contacting everyone  they and their fellow radicals of the anti-Vietnam War movement had reviled — the  CIA and FBI, the Pentagon, local police red squads, wealthy conservatives, GOP  strategists, and even the Ku Klux Klan.
Their announced objective was to build a  grand coalition to rid American politics of the Enemy Within — the evil leftists,  liberals, environmentalists, and Zionists.
Over the next decade the LaRouchians made extraordinary inroads into  American politics, surpassing the achievements of any other extremist movement  in recent American history.
Their success was all the more impressive  considering that it was achieved during a period of economic prosperity and  political stability.
They built a nationwide election machine that fielded thousands of candidates in  Democratic primaries in the mid-1980s, frequently picking up 20 percent or more  of the vote and winning dozens of nominations for public office.
In 1986  LaRouchians won the Democratic nominations for lieutenant governor and  secretary of state in Illinois.
Although this triggered attacks from the media and  Democratic Party regulars, so-called LaRouche Democrats continued to win  nominations and garner high vote percentages through 1988.
In addition, their  movement raised over $200 million in loans and donations from the American  public during the 1980s, a sum far in excess of what any other extremist group  had ever collected in this country.
LaRouche, who was a perennial presidential  candidate, used much of this money to purchase frequent half-hour network  television spots.
In effect, he became the televangelist of secular extremism, with  each TV appearance helping him raise money to pay for the next one.
LaRouche also set up an international political intelligence "news service," a kind  of parallel CIA, which gained him the ear not just of CIA officials but also of top  National Security Council aides.
He and his followers became valued, although  unofficial, consultants to the Reagan administration during its first term.
With  NSC and Pentagon approval — and a little boost from the Department of State —  they helped to promote the Strategic Defense Initiative ("Star Wars") throughout  the United States and overseas.
They also served the interests of the  administration and the GOP through various forms of snooping, smear  campaigns, dirty tricks, and propaganda.
This included things the Republicans  could not directly carry out, such as the rumor campaign in 1988 about Michael     Dukakis's mental health.
Over the years the beneficiaries of LaRouche's  snooping and trickery (whether solicited or not) included Ronald Reagan during  his 1980 New Hampshire primary race, Labor Secretary Ray Donovan, U.S.  Senator Jesse Helms, Panamanian dictator Manuel Noriega, New Orleans crime  lord Carlos Marcello, auto magnate John DeLorean, and the South African  Bureau of State Security.
The LaRouchians also helped out the late Teamsters  boss Jackie Presser.
Indeed, they made themselves useful in the late 1970s and  early 1980s to officials on every level of the nation's most powerful union,  providing "truth squads" that helped hoodlum elements maintain control of restive  locals.
The media consistently avoided dealing with the fact that LaRouche had become  a significant player in American politics.
He was often described (by people who  had not bothered to read his writings) as an eccentric whose ideas were too  bizarre to worry about.
The truth was that LaRouche was a man with a coherent  program, subtle tactics, and — what is usually lacking in American politics — a  long-range plan of how to get from here to there.
Both in word and in deed, he  was a serious ideologue in the classic European fascist mold.
His pendulum  swing from left to right in the 1970s had followed the pattern of Benito Mussolini,  who was a socialist newspaper editor before founding Italy's Fascist Party.
Likewise, LaRouche's occasional reversion to left-wing rhetoric when useful fit  the pattern of the early Nazi brownshirts, who, after all, fancied themselves as  "National Socialists.
"   LaRouche's classic fascist tactics included making demagogic appeals to  mutually opposed constituencies (for instance, white supremacists and black  nationalists) to unite them around a supposedly higher program.
His synthetic  ideology combined anti-Semitism with extreme militarism and the need for an  authoritarian regime to rescue the industrial capitalist system from what he  believed was an impending crisis.
In the late 1970s, his followers began  cultivating conservative businessmen with the message that LaRouche was the  man to save the nation.
Meanwhile, they set in motion their plan for a populist  mass movement of farmers, small businessmen, and blue-collar workers, whose  anger over drugs, unemployment, and high interest rates was to be channeled  against the "Zionists.
" The political theory at work evidently was that  simultaneous pressure from above and below, as in Germany in 1933, would put  LaRouche into power at the propitious moment.
The American public had encountered few authentic homegrown fascists since  the days of the German-American Bund and the Silver Shirts in the 1930s.
Fascism had become, in the eyes of most, a relic of Europe's past with little  relevance to politics today, and especially not to American politics.
Before  LaRouche, the closest approximations to a fascist movement in postwar America  were the so-called hate groups — cross-burning Klansmen in bed sheets and  goose-stepping neo-Nazi misfits in homemade uniforms.
LaRouche for his part,  being an educated man seriously committed to gaining power, avoided the     simple-minded tactics and self-isolating symbols of these groups.
When he  wanted to signal his ultimate goals, he did so with finesse.
For instance, during a  1988 presidential campaign ad on network television he urged in a low-key genial  manner the rebuilding of Germany's Reichstag and the uniting of Europe from the  Atlantic to the Urals.
This was to be accomplished through an alliance of  Germany and America to save the West, as LaRouche had repeatedly urged.
Clearly, any display of a swastika banner would have been redundant.
LaRouche's relative urbanity made him more dangerous than the traditional hate-  group leaders.
Although the economic crisis and 1930s-style mass movement  that he dreamed of did not arrive in the 1980s, he developed ties with many  influential Americans in odd places, from Oklahoma oilmen through Detroit  racketeers through conservative think-tankers in Washington.
He tapped into  their willingness to listen, although as yet only half-seriously, to the seemingly  unthinkable.
He made the fascist option a subject of legitimate debate by calling  it something else (such as "humanism") or simply leaving it unnamed.
The sophistication that LaRouche brought to the American ultraright included his  use of recruitment and control tactics borrowed from religious cults.
Some  observers, after encountering an especially cultish LaRouche follower, would  define the group as being more like the Hari Krishnas than a political organization  (and hence as less of a problem than the traditional hate groups).
But the  LaRouche organization's brainwashing methods deepened the commitment of its  members to an extraordinary degree.
The few hundred LaRouche cadres often  performed organizational and fund-raising feats that an ordinary sect or a  mainstream political organization would require many thousands of volunteers to  carry out.
Yet the NCLC ultimately was a political vanguard organization more  than a cult, although it used cult methods in an intensive manner.
(In this it was  far from unique: Hitler's SS merged cultism and politics, as did Mao's Communist  Party.
Cult-style brainwashing was employed in the 1980s not only by the NCLC  but also by PLO terrorists, Peruvian guerrillas.
Central American death squads,  and Christian fundamentalist political cadres in the Republican Party — to cite but  a few examples.
None of these groups were dismissed simply as a "cult" by the  media.)
LaRouche avoided serious opposition for many years not just because of the cult  label, but also because the media chose to portray him as a kook.
Curiously, he  delighted in encouraging this viewpoint by confirming to all and sundry that  indeed he did believe the Queen of England pushes drugs.
Yet underneath this  useful pose of eccentricity (which cost him little yet sidetracked so much potential  trouble for him), LaRouche strove to tap into something quite serious: the  undercurrents of collective irrationalism in American politics.
As he well knew, a  significant portion of the American public had proven susceptible in the past,  under conditions of economic distress or rapid social change, to ideas not unlike  what he was espousing.
During the Great Depression, this paranoid style in  American politics had developed briefly into a large-scale pro-fascist movement.
with millions of citizens listening to the radio priest Father Coughlin and joining  the America First Committee.
Even in the prosperous conditions after World War  II, periodic eruptions continued: McCarthyism, the John Birch Society, the 1968  George Wallace campaign, the anti-busing movement of the 1970s.
To be sure, none of these postwar movements were really fascist.
They lacked a  truly fascist ideology, as well as a vanguard to provide the will to fascism.
But  what they had lacked LaRouche attempted in the 1980s to provide.
He created in  his voluminous writings an ideology that embodied the essence of fascism in an  updated, Americanized form.
He recruited a vanguard to organize around his  program, while pioneering in slick new tactics to inject his ideas into strata of our  society that traditionally had shown themselves susceptible to paranoid populism.
Many of his counterparts in the Ku Klux Klan and other traditional white  supremacist circles had so little self-confidence that they rarely tried to organize  outside their own rural or blue-collar strata.
But LaRouche reached out boldly to  people of wealth and power, as well as to the forgotten and disinherited, striving  to develop both a public and a private dialogue on any terms, no matter how  opportunistic.
The NCLC chairman also built an organizational structure of extraordinary  complexity to support his multileveled political organizing.
In its mid-1980s form,  this structure was dominated by the NCLC National Executive Committee, a  dozen stalwarts operating under LaRouche's daily instructions.
The NCLC had  regional or local units in over twenty cities, each with its own steering committee.
It also had a national office staff in Leesburg, Virginia, divided into "sectors" —  legal, finance, operations, intelligence, and security.
This central bureaucracy ran  the "entities" — a network of political action committees, publishing ventures,  educational and fund-raising arms, and business fronts.
The public directly encountered only the entities, not the shadowy NCLC.
The  National Democratic Policy Committee (NDPC) was the chief vehicle for  LaRouchian electoral activity.
The Fusion Energy Foundation (FEF) was its  scientific think tank and an important lobbying tool.
The NCLC also sponsored  the Schiller Institute, an international propaganda arm headed by LaRouche's  German wife, Helga Zepp-LaRouche.
Much of the NCLC's financial resources were poured into a propaganda machine  that disseminated anti-Semitic literature nationwide in artfully disguised forms.
The most important publication was the NCLC's twice-weekly newspaper.
New  Solidarity (called The New Federalist after 1986).
The Campaigner, a monthly,  was the theoretical journal.
Persons who stopped at LaRouchian airport literature  tables were most likely to see the weekly newsmagazine Executive Intelligence  Review (EIR), as well as paperback books published by the New Benjamin  Franklin Publishing House.
The titles were catchy: Dope, Inc., The Hitler Book,  and What Every Conservative Should Know about Communism.
Although the ultimate goals of the LaRouche network were political, the fund  raising was an obsessive daily routine.
Hundreds of LaRouche followers fanned  out each morning to airports around the country or to the NCLC's telephone  "boiler rooms" at shifting locations.
While selling literature and cadging donations,  their chief aim was to solicit loans (often from senior citizens) that would rarely be  repaid.
Potential lenders were told they would be helping a patriotic or  humanitarian cause (such as SDI or research to cure AIDS) while supposedly  earning a high interest rate.
The weekly EIR, high-priced special reports,  videocassettes, the frequent television ads in which LaRouche addressed the  nation in a "presidential" manner — all were used to gain the confidence of  potential lenders.
The income from loans and donations was shuttled from entity  to entity in a never-ending shell game to avoid creditors and the IRS, and to  guarantee that the maximum funds would always be available for LaRouche's  pursuit of political influence and power.
The NCLC National Executive Committee thus served not just as a general staff  but also as a board of directors, with LaRouche as chairman of the board.
His  presidential campaigns provided a cover of constitutionally protected activity for  what became an increasingly predatory financial empire.
When faced with  criminal and civil proceedings, he claimed "political persecution" and often sued  the investigating agency or creditor for violation of his civil rights.
His intelligence-  gathering and propaganda networks also helped protect the financial operation  by investigating the investigators and launching smear campaigns against  creditors.
The system was not foolproof: After 1986, dozens of LaRouche's  followers were indicted for credit card and loan fraud and other offenses.
In  October 1988, LaRouche himself was indicted on charges of defrauding lenders  of over $30 million.
But his fundraisers still continued to rake in large amounts  each week.
(LaRouche and six top aides were convicted on fraud and conspiracy  charges in December 1988.)
LaRouche's political and financial network did not end at the borders of the  United States.
He had created an international web that included political parties  in eight countries inspired by his ideology and financed in part by his fundraising  schemes.
Together with the NCLC, they comprised the International Caucus of  Labor Committees (ICLC).
The largest branch was in West Germany, with  vigorous organizations also in France, Italy, Sweden, Canada, Mexico, Colombia,  and Peru~and support networks in at least a dozen other countries.
Each ICLC  member party had its own array of front groups.
Their combined membership  apart from the NCLC was no more than one thousand, but their influence in  several countries was far greater than the numbers alone would suggest.
Their  high level of motivation, financial support from the U.S. organization, and open  and covert support from military officers, government officials, or trade union  leaders in countries with strong right-wing tendencies all played a role.
The result  was the world's best-organized, wealthiest, and ideologically most sophisticated  neofascist operation of the 1980s — ruled not from the jungles of Paraguay, as in  a B-grade movie, but from a country estate thirty minutes from Washington, D.C.
In 1 981 , the creator of this political network ruminated — in his only published  work of overt fiction, a short story — about the possible circumstances under  which an individual who threatens the social order can act out his dreams.
There is a "fabric of social controls," LaRouche wrote, which usually restrains such  individuals.
These controls supposedly are based on the ability to identify and  keep track of potential troublemakers "in the equivalent of some computer filing  system.
" But what if the system "misses a problem-case with special  capabilities"?
Does not the "very habit of reliance on the system" become the  system's main vulnerability?
In LaRouche's story, a "paranoid technologist" is  believed to have invented an "infernal machine" to blow up downtown Chicago.
The detective-hero of the story (not surprisingly, LaRouche himself) struggles to  deduce what is going on after the authorities clamp a security screen around the  incident.
In the chapters that follow, we shall invert this process.
We shall pierce the  screen that has concealed the real story of political "technologist" Lyndon  LaRouche and his potentially explosive ideology and movement.
Why did  society's containment system miss this "problem-case"?
How did LaRouche  break out of quarantine?
Did powerful people know all along who and what he  was, deciding simply to use him for their own purposes?
Why did he remain  invulnerable to prosecution for so many years?
How did he inspire so much fear  in those who should have led an early fight to drive him back into quarantine?
This book will examine these questions as well as investigate the motives of the  remarkable range of allies that LaRouche gathered along the way — hoodlums,  spooks, Klansmen, mercenaries, defense scientists, political wheeler-dealers,  diplomats, retired generals.
New Right ideologues, foreign dictators, and White  House aides.
What was LaRouche's secret appeal that attracted people from  both the heights and the depths of our society, and still attracts them today?
PART ONE: The Vanguard   Cry for the duck?
You silly chickens!
This is a hawk.
See now how he moves.
—LYNDON H. LAROUCHE, JR., "Morning Is a  Wonderful Day"   Chapter One   Makings of an Ideologue   In the mid-1960s Lyndon LaRouche saw protest movements burgeoning  throughout America and sensed for the first time the real possibility of political  power.
What he needed to start with, he decided, was a cadre of several hundred  full-time organizers, tightly organized and armed with the correct strategy and  tactics.
He understood that such a vanguard could only seize power in a social  crisis far greater than that triggered by the Vietnam War or the civil rights  struggle.
But he believed such a crisis was inevitable.
If the organization and  program were developed years in advance, the masses could be swiftly  mobilized at the right moment.
This appeared to be standard Marxist doctrine, but LaRouche added his own  unique twist: The members of the revolutionary party must be intellectually of a  superior breed — a philosophical elite as well as a political vanguard.
In the  following years this innovation became more and more important in his thinking,  and he broke completely with Marxism.
He began to portray his philosophical  elite as the forerunners of a biological-cultural master race, which he called the  "golden souls" after Plato's aristocratic usage.
They would rise to power, he  taught, by championing the interests of industrial capitalism.
LaRouche's swing from far left to far right was not without precedent: Mussolini  was also a socialist before throwing in his lot with the upper classes and  launching Italian fascism.
But in LaRouche's case there was an additional twist.
He had adopted Marxism as a young man to escape the ultraconservatism and  religious fundamentalism of his parents.
His shift to the right in the 1970s would  be partly a return to this mental universe of his childhood.
Lyndon Hermyle LaRouche, Jr., was born in Rochester, New Hampshire, on  September 8, 1922, the oldest of three children.
His father, the son of a French-     Canadian immigrant, was a United Slioe IVIacliinery Corporation roadman  earning a comfortable salary.
His mother, the former Jesse Weir, came from an  evangelical Protestant background.
Both parents regarded themselves as  orthodox Quakers, Lyndon Sr. having converted from Roman Catholicism in his  teens.
Lyndon Jr.'s first ten years were spent in Rochester, where his two sisters were  born and where he attended the School Street elementary school.
The rest of his  childhood and youth were spent in Lynn, Massachusetts, to which the family  moved after Lyndon Sr. resigned from United Shoe to launch his own business.
LaRouche has described his childhood as that of "an egregious child, I wouldn't  say an ugly duckling but a nasty duckling.
" He felt socially isolated.
This was  partly because of his precociousness.
He learned to read at age five and was  soon dipping into adult books in the family library.
Kids at school called him "Big  Head.
" A greater problem was his parents' strictures.
When he was about to  begin first grade he was summoned to the family dining room and told that under  no circumstances could he fight with other children, even in self-defense.
This  resulted, according to LaRouche, in "years of hell" from bullies at school.
Despite their belief in nonviolence, LaRouche's parents did not fit the popular  stereotype of gentle and tolerant Quakers.
The two were ferocious sectarians  who accused their co-religionists of closet Bolshevism and embezzlement of  religious funds.
They wanted their son to share these beliefs.
LaRouche recalls  being herded with other children into a basement when he was eight years old to  listen to a woman evangelist fulminate against the evils of communism.
She  denounced him to his parents when he accidentally crumpled his song sheet.
LaRouche writes that his mother spent most of her time on "church work" and  that his father's chief interest, apart from his career, was in assisting this work.
How this affected LaRouche is suggested by his vehement opposition as an adult  to matriarchal elements in religion (e.g., the goddess Isis and the Virgin Mary), as  well as his numerous psychological tracts about an archetypal "witch mother" who renders her children and husband "impotent.
"   Visits to his grandparents provided young LaRouche some relief from the rigid  home atmosphere.
He was especially fond of his maternal grandfather Weir, a  United Brethren minister in Qhio, who stimulated his interest in biblical history.
Forty years later this interest would resurface in LaRouche's conspiracy theories  about the ancient Near East.
LaRouche continued to feel like a social leper in high school.
He withdrew into  his books, took long walks in the woods, and accumulated an enormous  resentment against his peers.
He found solace in the great philosophers,  especially Descartes, Leibnitz, and Kant, whose works helped him rationalize his  social isolation.
He was the victim, he mused, of an educational system based on     the evil ideas of Jolin Dewey and Britisli empiricism.
Tliis belief persisted into  adulthood.
In his 1979 autobiography, The Power of Reason, he describes his  high school tormenters as "unwitting followers of David Hume" (the eighteenth-  century philosopher).
Kant's ideas in particular prompted LaRouche to question his parents' beliefs and  their plans for him to become a minister.
He stopped carrying the King James  Bible to school every day.
But when his sisters rebelled more openly, LaRouche  disapproved.
He regarded them as shallow creatures, concerned only with  winning the approval of their peers.
In spite of his growing doubts about religion, LaRouche supported his parents'  war against their Quaker brethren.
The immediate issue was a trust fund for  religious education left by a wealthy uncle of LaRouche's mother.
The  LaRouches objected to the money being given to the liberal-minded American  Friends Service Committee (AFSC).
The bitterness of this dispute is reflected in a 1937 tract LaRouche Sr. published  under the pseudonym Hezekiah Micajah Jones.
Its rambling and abusive style  and obsession with conspiracies foreshadow LaRouche Jr.'s writings forty years  later.
The elder LaRouche denounced the Friends' handling of religious trust  funds as a "swindle.
" Quaker ministers, he said, were preaching the "principles of  Communism," and he could count on his fingers the number of them that were  not part of the plot.
He singled out Quaker reform leader Rufus Jones for urging  "love for everyone including, without doubt, Satan.
" "The Qrthodox Quaker,"  LaRouche Sr. vowed, "will not join hands with the ungodly, nor will he go down  into Babylon and join forces.
" Only Qrthodox Quakers, he said, have a "right to  the name Christian.
"   Turning to world affairs, the pamphlet berated certain Quakers who had criticized  "one of the governments opposed to Communism" (apparently either Mussolini's  Italy or Hitler's Germany) at a world peace conference in Philadelphia.
The  pamphlet also chided participants at a regional Friends conference in  Providence, Rhode Island, for not responding favorably to an anti-Jewish speech  by a Palestinian Arab.
According to LaRouche Sr., the speaker presented his  views "well and authoritatively ... his attitude should be given more  consideration.
"   In Qctober 1941, the Lynn Meeting disowned LaRouche Sr. for his disruptive  behavior.
His wife and nineteen-year-old son resigned in protest.
The LaRouches  later established a schismatic Quaker group in Boston, and the bitterness  persisted for decades.
In a 1978 article, LaRouche Jr. charged that the American  Friends Service Committee had used "intelligence-mode 'dirty tricks' operations"  to isolate his parents.
Before Pearl Harbor, LaRouche attended Northeastern University in Boston.
By  liis own account lie received poor grades and incurred liis fatlier's wratli.
In late  1942 he entered a Civilian Public Service (GPS) camp for conscientious  objectors, as did many other young Quakers.
The camp, in West Campton, New  Hampshire, was administered by the AFSC.
LaRouche promptly joined a small  faction at odds with the administrators.
After a little over a year LaRouche became fed up with GPS life, which he later  compared to "a 'soft' model of the Nazi concentration camps.
" The experience  had taught him, he said, the "unbridgeable dividing line" between "bestiality" (i.e.,  the AFSC) and "humanity.
" He contacted the Selective Service to enlist in the  Army as a noncombatant.
LaRouche has given two versions of this decision.
In a 1974 autobiographical  piece, he said that after engaging in political discussions with socialists and ex-  Communists in the camp and being introduced to the first volume of Marx's Das  Kapital, he decided to join the Army.
In a second version, written after his swing  to the right, he does not mention any Marxist influences, and claims he intended  to join the Army all along.
According to this version, he entered the GPS camp for  a few months as a temporary concession to his parents, to soften the blow of his  inevitable enlistment.
The late Boston publisher Porter Sargent, who was LaRouche's close friend in  the GPS camp, confirmed the first version to the Boston Phoenix.
He said  LaRouche had been a "serious deep pacifist," well versed in "all the ways of  active nonviolence.
"   LaRouche was inducted into the Army in early 1944 and served as a private in  medical and ordnance units in the Ghina-Burma-lndia theatre.
While stationed  near Galcutta he attempted, without much success, to organize GIs to work with  the local Gommunist Party.
In his 1974 reminiscences, he told of meeting P.G.  Joshi, a Galcutta Gommunist leader.
Joshi supposedly rejected the twenty-three-  year-old LaRouche's suggestion that the Indian Gommunists should stage an  immediate uprising in Bengal against the British colonial government.
LaRouche  said he walked out of Joshi's headquarters thoroughly disillusioned with  Stalinism: "By the time [I] reached the bottom of the stairs, [I] was a sort of  hardened Trotskyist.
"   This story also underwent heavy revision.
A 1983 LaRouche campaign  biography, prepared under his close supervision, says that his contacts with  Indians, including lowly street sweepers, left him deeply "gratified and touched"  by their admiration for U.S. capitalism.
He returned to America, according to this  version, determined to provide India with a "flow of capital-goods exports.
"   LaRouche was mustered out of the Army in May 1946.
Later that year he gave  Northeastern University a second try.
He intended to major in physics, but soon     quit in protest over wliat lie regarded as an all-pervasive academic "philistinism.
"  His autobiographical writings do not mention any subsequent attempt to gain a  university degree.
In December 1948, LaRouche applied for membership in the Socialist Workers  Party (SWP), an affiliate of the Trotskyist Fourth International.
This was no trivial  decision.
The Cold War and the resulting Red Scare were already underway.
Dozens of Communist Party members had been indicted on conspiracy charges.
The trade union movement was in the throes of a political purge that would soon  extend to the academic world and the arts.
The SWP, which had been targeted  under the Smith Act during the war, remained on the Attorney General's list of  subversive organizations and was under close FBI surveillance.
As Senator  Joseph McCarthy began his demagogic rise, both the SWP and the Communist  Party feared that fascism was taking hold in America.
Many leftists tore up their  party cards, hoping to avoid the worst to come.
LaRouche was admitted to full party membership in early 1949 and adopted a  party pseudonym to avoid trouble with employers and the FBI.
Journalists have  speculated that his choice, "Lyn Marcus," was intended to suggest a personal  affinity with Lenin and Marx, although LaRouche says it was based on the  nickname "Marco Polo" given to him during the war.
LaRouche went to work at the GE River Works in Lynn, under the SWP policy of  industrial colonizing — the sending of intellectuals to work in factories in the hope  of recruiting worker cadres.
Within months he was put under party discipline for  advocating a "tactical alliance" with the Stalinists.
He soon tired of the proletarian  life, and was glad to escape into a part-time job with his father.
Although the  SWP's sectarian dogmatism was beginning to remind him of his parents'  religiosity, he thought the party could be changed from within.
He spent much  time with the late Larry Trainor, a middle-aged printer who headed the Boston  SWP, seeking approval for his maverick views.
Former Boston comrades recall  him as an earnest young man whose life seemed to revolve around the Trotskyist  movement's endless ideological debates.
In 1954, LaRouche moved to New York City and married fellow SWP member  Janice Neuberger.
The party's national center was in New York, and he hoped to  gain recognition as one of its rising ideological stars.
He became friendly with  Janice's close friends Myra Tanner Weiss and the late Murray Weiss, who led a  small SWP faction.
Myra Weiss recalls that "Lyndy" was a "quite dedicated" party  member.
He faithfully attended branch meetings, distributed party literature, and  participated in election campaigns.
He also wrote long erudite documents that he  circulated to party leaders.
Several shorter pieces appeared under his name in  SWP publications, and he occasionally gave party-sponsored lectures on  economics.
But according to Murray Weiss, he remained on the party's outskirts,  never able to win the leadership's trust.
Through the years LaRouche has given various versions of his relationship to the  SWP.
In a 1970 essay he described his SWP membership from 1949 until his  expulsion in 1966 as "my seventeen-year passage.
" The essay provided  exhaustive details of his long struggle for a pristine revolutionism untainted by  ideological compromise.
However, his 1983 biography, written to win  conservative support, omits any reference to the SWP.
It depicts his involvement  in unspecified "left politics" as lasting only for a brief period in the late 1940s.
According to this account, LaRouche wrote to Dwight D. Eisenhower, urging him  to run for President in 1948.
When Eisenhower failed to enter the race,  LaRouche reluctantly joined the left as the best alternative for struggling against  "Trumanism.
"   LaRouche has also repeatedly suggested that he served as a government  informant within the SWP.
In an October 1986 interview on ABC Radio's Bob  Grant show he said he went back into the SWP after the early 1 950s "because  the FBI approached me to go back.
" He explained: "I promised [the FBI] if I found  anything that was wrong, as a citizen I would tell them.
" But Janice LaRouche  does not believe her ex-husband worked for the FBI.
She believes he was  sincere in his Marxist beliefs, and only discarded them years later.
Other former  SWP members who knew LaRouche agree with Janice.
The LaRouches' only child, Daniel, was born in 1956.
At this point, LaRouche  began to channel more and more of his energy into building a career in  management consulting.
For several years he was associated with the George S.  May Company, often making a thousand dollars a week or more helping  corporations reduce labor costs.
He outlined his approach to troubleshooting in a  1962 essay: If management tells you to keep your nose out of an area, that area  is precisely where you should snoop first.
LaRouche became interested in computer technology after reading Norbert  Wiener's book Cybernetics.
Recognizing that computers were the wave of the  future, he pioneered in computer-complex installations and software design.
He  also tried his hand at computer theory, speculating on the possibility of a total-  systems technology to manage the entire U.S. economy.
Janice recalls that he could work "for forty hours at a stretch without sleeping or  eating.
" During one of these round-the-clock binges, ruminating on Marvin  Minsky's artificial intelligence theories, he experienced a quasi-mystical  inspiration that deeply altered his view of reality. "
During the night I sat and  paced, alternately, sleepless, going through the matter repeatedly," he wrote in  The Power of Reason. "
In that moment, I saw clearly, for the first time, the nature of the solution to the 'particle-field paradox' — not as something I understood . . .  but as a solution I could 'see.'
" LaRouche has never revealed the precise nature  of this solution, yet he wrote that his experience was "on a relative scale of things  . . . one of greatness.
I know what the realized pinnacles of human personal     development are in our time and, to large measure, in earlier times.
I have,  essentially, matched them.
"   He began to fancy himself an expert on psychoanalysis as well as physics.
According to The Power of Reason, he held free counseling sessions with a  troubled young man named Griswold, who supposedly was driven away by a  tactless remark of Janice's.
LaRouche heard several months later that Griswold  had committed suicide.
The news of this tragedy, LaRouche writes, was the "last  straw" in his accumulated resentments against Janice.
They separated in 1963,  and he moved into an apartment on Morton Street in Greenwich Village with  Carol Schnitzer, an SWP comrade who became his main collaborator in the  founding of the National Caucus of Labor Committees.
Soon "Lyn Marcus" and "Carol LaRouche" (they never married) were deeply  immersed in factionalism in and around the SWP.
They organized support work  for a Trotskyist-influenced strike of New York City welfare workers in 1965, and  held conspiratorial meetings with expelled SWP members.
LaRouche lost  interest in his consulting business and spent most of his time studying and  writing, seeking to develop a new version of Marxism that could bring him a  personal following.
His experience with the SWP's ineptness had convinced him  that "no revolutionary movement was going to be brought into being in the USA  unless I brought it into being.
"   CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Two   Do You Believe in Marxist Magic?
LaRouche's pretensions to the mantle of Lenin and Trotsl<y were by no means  odd in tine America of tine mid-1960s.
As tine movement against tine Vietnam War  began to stir, new activist organizations sprouted like mushrooms.
Antiwar  students battled the police in New York in 1964 and gathered by the tens of  thousands in Washington the following year.
Many burned their draft cards at  public rallies. "
Free universities" were founded as an alternative to an official  academia believed to be corrupted by defense contracts and CIA recruiters.
Anticommunism rapidly fell out of fashion.
When the House Un-American  Activities Committee tried to probe Communist influence in the fledgling antiwar  movement, students who were subpoenaed treated the committee with  contempt, turning the hearings into forums to denounce the war.
Meanwhile, the  Harlem riots of 1964 became the prototype for ghetto rebellions across the  country.
Malcolm X and then the Black Panthers gave a political voice to this  rage.
For the first time in decades, the Establishment appeared to be on the  defensive.
Young radicals pored over the writings of Che Guevara and Mao  Zedong, embibing the belief that sheer revolutionary will can move mountains.
It was within this heady New Left atmosphere that LaRouche, a product of the  Old Left but attuned to the new possibilities, made his first bid for leadership  beyond the orbit of the SWP.
He initially focused on the American Committee for  the Fourth International (ACFI), a Trotskyist splinter group with about twenty  members.
He vowed to transform it into a proper "cadre organization," then expand into the  larger world beyond Trotskyism.
Tim Wohlforth, former leader of the ACFI, recalls  that for six months during 1 965-66 he and LaRouche met almost every day to  plot factional intrigues.
The ACFI was under the influence of Britain's Socialist Labour League (SLL), a  bitter rival of the SWP.
In October 1965, Wohlforth, LaRouche, and other  schismatics traveled to Montreal to meet with Gerald Healy, the SLL chairman, to  discuss a plan for a new revolutionary party in the United States.
The first stage  would be to merge the ACFI with a somewhat larger SWP spin-off, the Spartacist  League.
The second stage would be to reach out to radical students.
A tentative  unity plan was agreed on, which LaRouche later called the "Montreal Concordat,"  as if the persons involved had been Great Power diplomats.
He hoped to  become the chairman of the fused organizations.
However, Healy repudiated the     scheme and forced LaRouche to resign from the ACFI.
The "franchise" for  Healyism in America went to the more pliable Wolhforth.
It is ironic that LaRouche should have chosen a satellite of Healy's SLL for his  first foray outside the SWP.
The SLL later became famous under a new name,  the Workers Revolutionary Party, as the vehicle for actress Vanessa Redgrave's  anti-Zionism.
As early as the mid-1960s it displayed some of the features of a  political cult.
Over the next two decades Chairman Healy developed, as did  LaRouche, a full-blown political megalomania.
The WRP split in 1985, and the  anti-Healy faction went public with charges about subsidies from the Libyans and  Healy's affairs with young women comrades.
The British tabloid press had a field  day with this "Reds in the Bed" scandal.
LaRouche learned important lessons from Healy.
He later wrote about the SLL  leader's use of goon squads and psychological intimidation to control his  followers.
While LaRouche had naively tried to win support through ideological  persuasion, Healy had gone for the jugular.
The basic method, LaRouche wrote,  was an old one: First, you "isolate and publicly degrade dangerous individuals.
"  Once they are psychologically "broken," you "assimilate" them into your machine  as "useful party hacks.
" LaRouche claimed that "any experienced leader in the  socialist movement knows exactly how [such] 'brainwashing' is accomplished.
"  But he boasted that he had personally resisted the process: "Healy was dealing  with a person who knew all about that game; it didn't work out as he planned.
"   LaRouche concluded that he could easily have won "hegemony" over the ACFI  but for Healy's interference. "
My commitments, temperament and creative  abilities," he said, "seem to generate a certain amount of 'charisma.'
" But he  would need an organization of his own, with no rival gurus allowed.
As for  Trotskyism, it was basically dead.
A viable revolutionary movement could only be  launched "from scratch.
" LaRouche observed, "Once you have struggled free of  the sewer, you do not jump back into it.
"   He began to offer Marxist classes under the sponsorship of the Free School of  New York.
Its summer 1967 catalogue described his course on dialectical  materialism as supposedly fulfilling "training requirements of revolutionary  leadership cadres.
" LaRouche did not bother with the trendy theories of Herbert  Marcuse or the simplistic essays of Chairman Mao.
His students read the three  volumes of Marx's Das Kapital.
In preparation they studied Hegel, Kant, and  Leibnitz.
This was to winnow out all those lacking in a "passion for more profound  scientific accomplishments.
" The ones who persisted were invited to daylong  LaRouche seminars and were encouraged to do political organizing under his  direction — "laboratory work," he called it.
One of the first projects was a  campaign against real estate speculators featuring the slogan "Tax Landlords,  Not People.
" LaRouche meanwhile wrote The Third Stage of Imperialism, a  pamphlet that warned about "cancerous speculative growth" in the U.S.  economy.
LaRouche targeted the Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), wliicli liad  become the activist organization on campuses from coast to coast.
A lesser  tactician would have charged in with his tiny band of disciples and challenged the  existing tendencies head-on.
Instead, LaRouche concentrated on enticing to his  banner key members of SDS's most ideological element — the campus cadre of  the Progressive Labor Party.
The PLP was a Maoist group led by former members of the Communist Party  USA.
Its campus members and supporters had joined SDS in 1965 with the aim  of taking control.
Most SDS members were political novices, but those in the PLP  had a coherent ideology, clarity of program, and the guidance of adults who  understood how to manipulate loosely organized mass movements.
By 1967 a  few hundred PLP student enthusiasts across the country exerted much influence,  in spite of the hostility of the SDS national office.
The PLP had an Achilles' heel, however.
This was its doctrine of the student-  worker alliance — that campus radicals should take the antiwar movement and  PLP ideology to the blue-collar working class.
Although this strategy made sense  from a Marxist point of view, it resulted in pressure on students to do things they  didn't really want to do: get jobs in campus cafeterias, work in garment factories  during the summer, and sell Challenge (the PLP newspaper) at factory gates.
LaRouche offered a face-saving way out.
Linking up with the working class is  fine, he said, but it should be delayed until student cadres have mastered Das  Kapital and Hegel's Science of Logic.
In the meantime the student movement can  best serve the masses by leafleting against landlords in neighborhoods around  the campus.
Initial contact with the PLP was established through a LaRouche disciple at  Columbia who had several chums in the PLP — he had attended Great Neck  South High School on Long Island with them.
He persuaded them to attend one  of LaRouche's classes.
LaRouche was careful not to frighten them away with any  frontal assaults on the PLP's doctrines.
Instead he urged a united front around  shared goals.
Steve Fraser, who was one of the Great Neck PLPers, recalls how  LaRouche's cerebral form of charisma gradually won them over.
He said that  LaRouche would lecture for hours, extemporaneously and almost nonstop. "
He  ranged over the widest imaginable intellectual landscape," Fraser said. "
He  would show how the tool-making capacity of monkeys was supposedly  connected to the falling rate of profit.
It was mind-boggling and thrilling.
It also  demanded a higher intellectual effort than I had ever faced, and a certain moral  rigor . . . LaRouche challenged you existentially.
"   In November 1967, LaRouche's disciples and several New York PLP members  launched the "SDS Transit Project.
" The initial aim was to protest subway fare  increases, but the group soon took on other issues.
As the months passed, more  PLP supporters were brought to LaRouche's classes and strategy sessions.
When they began to raise his ideas at PLP meetings, they angered some of the  more dogmatic members.
But the PLP leadership hesitated to expel them.
In the spring of 1968, demonstrations erupted at Columbia against the  university's role in Pentagon research and its plan to build a gymnasium in  Harlem's Morningside Park.
Activists occupied several buildings, presented  "nonnegotiable demands," and shut the university down.
The event electrified  students across the nation as they watched the spectacle of chanting protesters  on TV against a colorful backdrop of red banners.
It seemed to give symbolic  form to their rage and romanticism.
Thousands of students who knew nothing  about Marxism began calling themselves SDS members and Marxists.
SDS was  transformed not only into a household name but also, briefly, into a formidable  political force.
Members of the PLP and the SDS Transit Committee were in the forefront of the  Columbia strike.
Tony Papert, chairman of Columbia PLP but heavily influenced  by LaRouche, led the occupation of Low Library in support of black students  barricaded in Hamilton Hall.
When the police arrived he held out with a handful of  associates, gradually attracting more and more students.
Other buildings were  seized, and the campus was effectively shut down.
A strike steering committee  was established, on which Papert and his friends wielded great influence.
It  seemed to the PLP's national leaders that the strike would become a PLP  triumph, strengthening its hand within SDS nationally.
But when the PLP  leadership tried to give further instructions to their Columbia club, they  discovered that LaRouche had most of the leverage.
LaRouche himself kept a relatively low profile on campus as the strike  approached its inevitable denouement, the famous charge by the NYPD's  Tactical Police Force that routed the forces of Revolution.
That summer, with the  campus still sizzling, he taught Marxism at a fraternity house turned "liberation  school.
" Gaunt, bushy-bearded, and attired in rumpled old clothes, he seemed  the quintessential off-campus guru basking in the admiration of student rebels.
Meanwhile, the PLP, having expelled Papert for "revisionism," found itself  isolated within Columbia SDS.
Control passed almost entirely into the hands of  SDS chapter chairman Mark Rudd, who was close to the SDS national  leadership.
Rudd had cooperated at first with the Papert group, but had little  sympathy for them.
He built his own influence through flamboyant speeches and  press interviews.
A strong PLP organization could have handled him by  emphasizing tactics and program, and did in fact prevent honcho-type leadership  from emerging during several later campus rebellions.
But the Papert group,  which began calling itself the SDS Labor Committee, was unable to outmaneuver  Rudd on its own.
It thus began to operate independently of the Columbia SDS  chapter, under LaRouche's direct command.
The real significance of LaRouclie's recruitment of Papert and liis liandful of  friends only became apparent during the following year.
The student movement  had entered its most volatile period during which — as the Columbia strike had  shown — aggressive organizers could ignite campus-wide protests attracting  thousands of previously moderate students.
Often two or three such organizers  on a campus could rapidly set up a strong new SDS chapter or gain dominance  within an already existing one.
Meanwhile, SDS's membership had grown to  more than 50,000 nationwide while influencing hundreds of thousands of  students indirectly.
Yet it remained an amorphous organization in many ways.
The conditions were thus favorable for the scattered but centrally directed  organizers of the PLP to realize their goal of capturing SDS and becoming a  pivotal force in the antiwar movement as a whole.
During the 1968-69 school year, the PLP and the SDS national office waged a  nationwide power struggle, preparing for the 1969 convention.
The PLP's  influence grew more rapidly than the national office's but not quite rapidly  enough.
LaRouche's raid had prevented the PLP from gaining national prestige  from the Columbia strike and also had deprived it of several of its best campus  organizers.
For instance, Steve Fraser, whom the PLP sent to Philadelphia to  take command of SDS, ended up joining LaRouche.
When a major strike erupted  at the University of Pennsylvania in early 1969, it was the Labor Committee, not  the PLP, which ran the show.
The result was that the PLP went into the 1969 Chicago convention without a  solid majority.
The mutual hostilities passed the point of no return and the PLP  was forced to take over prematurely.
It could not prevent the deposed leadership  and a large minority from setting up a parallel organization — the "real" SDS.
Although the latter soon fell apart, the PLP majority faction was unable to recover  momentum.
Isolated from the off-campus peace movement, SDS dwindled in  size over the next two years.
The main cause of the split was the sectarianism and ideological extremism of  the two major factions, not the actions of LaRouche's followers, who were reviled  as elitists by both camps.
But LaRouche's 1967-68 raid on the PLP had definitely  helped to tip the balance.
It was his first lesson in how a small but adroitly led  group, through the right tactics at the right time and place, can help to produce a  "manifold shift" in the larger political arena.
The lesson would hold him in good  stead in his later forays into mainstream politics.
LaRouche could never have influenced SDS without encouraging bold tactics,  especially during the Columbia and University of Pennsylvania strikes.
But when  he and his followers were wooing the New Right in the early 1980s, they  apparently felt an acute need to rewrite the history of their SDS involvement.
A  1983 LaRouchian pamphlet claimed that they had "agreed to penetrate" SDS in  1967-68 in order to "discredit and neutralize the leftism emerging at that time.
"     The pamphlet did not say who the other party to this agreement was, but strongly  implied it was some government agency.
The LaRouche organization did begin to cooperate with local police and the FBI  in the mid-1970s.
But former leading Labor Committee members say the idea of  a "penetration operation," circa 1968, is preposterous.
LaRouche's disciples  entered SDS filled with revolutionary fervor.
Their political strategy to develop  "class-wide organizing" and "mass strikes" was second to none in its radical  implications.
While advocating militancy, they scrupulously avoided the  provocateurish rhetoric and deeds that were the hallmark of police infiltrators.
In fact, the LaRouchians were themselves the target of government surveillance  and harassment.
The FBI's COINTELPRO operatives produced a leaflet entitled  "The Mouse Crap Revolution" aimed at discrediting Tony Papert among  Columbia students and driving a wedge between the Labor Committee and other  factions.
In Philadelphia the FBI and the local police Red Squad engaged in a  classic frame-up of Steve Fraser.
Explosives were planted in his refrigerator, and  he was charged with plotting to blow up the Liberty Bell.
(The indictment, which  drew heavy fire from civil libertarians, was eventually dismissed.)
The most telling refutation of the penetration-agent myth comes in a complaint  the LaRouchians themselves filed in 1982 in a federal court lawsuit against the  FBI.
It describes "constant and intrusive" visits by federal agents to NCLC  members' employers and landlords, hundreds of arrests on petty matters such as  street-corner soliciting, the use of police informers to infiltrate the organization,  and the compiling of over 25,000 pages of surveillance files.
All of this was  supposed to have taken place between 1968 and 1976.
If LaRouche was a  government agent, he was being provided with as much cover as the Howard  Hughes-CIA Glomar expedition!
In the wake of the SDS split, LaRouche picked up recruits sick of faction fights  and mindless slogans.
Already his followers were organizing independently of  SDS under a new name, the National Caucus of Labor Committees (NCLC).
By  1973 the NCLC had over six hundred hard-core members in twenty-five cities  and the most literate paper on the far left.
New Solidarity.
LaRouche also had  attracted a small following in Europe, chiefly in West Berlin and Stockholm.
He centralized the organization and began purging those of independent mind.
First to get the ax, in 1 971 , were the "Bavarians," a dissident circle whose chief  spokesman was Steve Fraser.
LaRouche then surrounded himself with  individuals willing to carry out his every whim.
Most important were Konstandinos  (Gus) Kalimtgis ("Gus Axios" or "Costas Axios") and Criton Zoakos ("Nick  Syvriotis"), former members of a left-wing Greek exile sect.
Together with a third  crony, Andy Typaldos ("Andreas Reniotis"), they became known as LaRouche's  "Greek mafia" and served as his key lieutenants for almost a decade.
NCLC  members developed their own cultish jargon — e.g., "creative mentation," "class-     for-itself," "left hegemony," "Promethean hubris.
" Many dropped out of school or  quit their jobs to organize full-time.
Often they cut themselves off from family and  friends, reordering their lives totally around the NCLC.
They came to believe that  the Revolution was just around the corner: The NCLC would seize control of  most major American trade unions within six months, overthrow the government  within the decade, and rule the world by the year 2000.
To hasten the process  they began disrupting meetings of other groups, seizing the microphone to give  vehement speeches to the effect that everyone except themselves was working  for the CIA.
Other SDS offshoots were behaving even more strangely as the exhilarating  days of campus rebellion receded.
The Weathermen worked themselves into a  frenzy via ultra-fanatical indoctrination sessions, then dove underground to make  bombs.
The Revolutionary Union built a personality cult around Chairman Bob  Avakian, who later fled to Paris claiming the ruling class was about to kill him.
The PLP marched through Boston's streets with sticks and Communist T-shirts to  combat the supposedly imminent threat of fascism.
Most of the ultraleft sects of the early 1970s adhered to standard variations of  Marxist-Leninist doctrine.
But LaRouche injected into the NCLC a conspiracy  theory of politics quite different from anything in the Marxist tradition.
In its early  stages, before he latched on to hardcore anti-Semitism, this theory held that the  Rockefeller family, through its alleged control of the CIA and a vast network of  agents on every level of society, was responsible for most of the world's ills.
The  Rockefellers, LaRouche taught, were plotting a nuclear holocaust.
Time was  running out.
The world's fate rested on the shoulders of the tiny NCLC.
Anyone  who couldn't see this was part of the plot.
Soon the NCLC's enemies list, like that  of Richard Nixon, was burgeoning.
It included not only most of the Establishment  but also NCLC defectors, leaders of rival sects, and distinguished scholars  whose only apparent sin was their refusal to recognize LaRouche's genius.
Such fanaticism, however, was sharply at variance with the flashes of  Machiavellian cynicism that began to appear in LaRouche's own writings.
In a  1970 essay on the dog-eat-dog world of left-wing factionalism, he observed that  ideology is mostly "designed for the purpose of deceiving — usually to deceive the  authors above all others.
" He added that most leftist honchos operate on the  hope that their "credulous followers and opponents" can be suckered into  accepting a given factional position at face value.
In reality, LaRouche argued,  the typical leftist leader "says in print and public debate that with which he wishes  to conceal his actual practice.
"   LaRouche put this theory of deception and manipulation to the test.
In the spring  of 1973, he launched his followers on the most extraordinary odyssey in the  history of American extremism: a journey to the farthest limits of the left and from  thence, by circuitous paths, to the outermost reaches of the right.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Three  Operation Mop Up     LaRouche's writings in the late 1960s displayed an intense curiosity about the  history and methods of European fascism.
His research, so his followers thought,  was aimed at learning how to prei/enMascism.
But his analysis differed in subtle  ways from that of other leftists.
One of the first observers to spot something  amiss was his old rival Tim Wohlforth.
In a 1968 article, Wohlforth noted  LaRouche's "preposterous theory" that the Nazi's murder of six million Jews had  been motivated solely by economics. "
It seems," wrote Wohlforth, "that when [the  Nazis] worked the Jews to a point where there was no labor power left in them,  they simply sent them to the gas chambers to save the cost of upkeep for  unproductive slaves.
" Wohlforth saw LaRouche's theory as just a one-sided  analysis of Nazi motives.
He didn't suspect that LaRouche one day would  develop his own brand of fascism.
In 1971, LaRouche published a major article on the prospects for fascist base  building in America, Only with a mass base, he observed, could a "storm trooper"  organization have "saleable qualities" that might attract support from "leading  governmental and financial interests.
" He predicted that such a movement would  emerge soon on the basis of a "populist" ideology and diverse appeals to rival  ethnic groups.
This movement would begin to furnish the capitalists with gangs to  "break strikes and break up socialist and union meetings.
" Although at first it  might include fascist-minded Jews, it would sooner or later turn on the Jewish  community.
The Jews, LaRouche observed, were "a most visible and thus 'ripe' "  candidate for the role of scapegoat.
LaRouche also predicted that a new type of left-wing group, defined as "left-  protofascist," would take part in the street violence on the side of overtly right-  wing ethnic fascists.
In subsequent articles he examined how the alleged  controllers of fascism, the American capitalist class, might use advanced  brainwashing techniques to transform leftist college students into precisely this  type of left-fascist "zombie.
" He meanwhile began to teach his own leftist  followers to regard themselves as "Prometheans," an elite far above the rest of  humanity,   LaRouche's implication was clear: The NCLC must learn from fascism and adopt  some of fascism's tactics.
But his followers still regarded themselves as good  Marxists (in spite of their elitist pretensions) and retained a visceral hatred of  fascism.
If LaRouche wanted to steer them to the right, he would have to turn the  NCLC into a controlled environment for ideological reeducation — a political cult.
The NCLC's transformation occurred in tliree overlapping stages during 1973-74.
First, LaRouclie ordered liis followers into the streets for a campaign of savage  attacks on rival leftist groups called Operation Mop Up.
This forced them to either  deepen their commitment or get out.
It also isolated them irrevocably from the  rest of the left.
Second, LaRouche staged "ego-stripping" sessions at NCLC meetings, instilling  in his followers a sense of shame over any ideological wavering or lack of  courage they might have displayed during Mop Up.
Finally, he whipped up an atmosphere of hysteria inside the NCLC based on  allegations of an assassination plot aimed against himself.
The acceptance of  these bizarre allegations severed most of the remaining links between NCLC  members and everyday reality.
Operation Mop Up was preceded by months of squabbling between the NCLC  and the Communist Party USA.
NCLC members had frequently disrupted CP  meetings with long harangues from the floor.
The CP began tossing them out  and published articles alleging that they were government agents.
Matters  escalated in early 1973 when the NCLC announced a conference in Philadelphia  to build a national organization for welfare recipients and the unemployed.
CP  members and other local activists started a campaign to discredit the conference,  calling its NCLC organizers racists as well as agents.
The NCLC leadership was  furious.
A New Solidarity front-page editorial, entitled "Deadly Crisis for CPUSA,"  warned the CP that if it didn't back off it would face an all-out counterattack.
The  CP failed to take the threat seriously.
On the conference's opening day the anti-NCLC coalition sent a sound truck  through the black community and staged a picket line with signs comparing the  NCLC to the Ku Klux Klan.
This failed to stop the event, which was attended by  several hundred white middle-class activists and a handful of welfare mothers.
The harassment did, however, give LaRouche the pretext he needed.
He called  an emergency meeting of the East Coast NCLC. "
From here on in," he declared,  "the CP cannot hold a meeting on the East Coast . . . We'll mop them up in two  months.
" The NCLC, he promised, would seize "hegemony" on the left — i.e.,  replace the CP as the dominant organization.
Many NCLC members were shocked and frightened by LaRouche's  announcement, but he anticipated their reluctance: "I know you better than you  know yourselves, and for the most part you're full of crap," he said. "
This isn't a  debating society anymore.
"   A front-page New Solidarity editorial, "Operation Mop Up: The Class Struggle Is  for Keeps," echoed LaRouche's call. "
We must dispose of this stinking corpse  [the CP]," the editorial said, "to ensure that it cannot act as a host for maggots  and other parasites preparing future scabby Nixonite attacks on the working     class.
... If we were to vacillate ... we would be guilty of betraying the human  race.
Our job is to pulverize the Communist Party.
"   Meanwhile, the NCLC leadership prepared an extraordinary psycho-theological  document, "The CP Within Us," to bolster morale.
The key to winning Mop Up, it  argued, was to expunge the inner voice of cowardice and hesitation (i.e., the CP)  within each NCLC member.
Months prior to Mop Up, LaRouche had ordered the most physically agile NCLC  members to undergo training for street fighting.
This training was now stepped  up.
Members were organized into flying squads armed with metal pipes, clubs,  and nunchukas (Okinawan martial arts devices consisting of two sticks attached  by a chain).
The idea was to go into action as mini-phalanxes with the nunchuka  wielders in the center.
Mop Up began in New York, and spread to Philadelphia, Buffalo, Detroit, and  other cities.
Attackers were sometimes brought from out of town so their faces  wouldn't be recognized.
In several cities they broke up public meetings and  invaded leftist bookstores, beating anyone who tried to bar their way.
In New  York they ambushed individual CP leaders on the street.
In Detroit they  administered a savage beating to a partially paralyzed left-wing activist on  crutches.
In Philadelphia, twenty-five to thirty NCLC members raided a meeting  of the Public Workers Action Caucus. "
The steps were a mass of blood," said a  PWAC activist. "
As soon as I walked out I was hit by a pole," Although no one  was critically injured in any of the attacks, several were hospitalized with broken  bones and many required medical treatment for cuts and bruises.
The NCLC rhetoric kept pace with the attacks. "
The red Communist Party has  turned into a den of yellow cowards," announced a LaRouche spokesman in  Philadelphia. "
CP Recruiting Pallbearers for Its Own Funeral," blared a headline  in the April 30 New Solidarity.
When members of the Socialist Workers Party and other Trotskyist groups came  forward to defend the CP despite past differences, the NCLC responded with an  announcement that henceforth the Trotskyists would be fair game.
Undeterred,  dozens of SWP supporters showed up to guard the CP's New York mayoral  candidate, Rasheed Storey, after the NCLC announced it would break up a  speech he was scheduled to give at Columbia.
Doug Jenness, a member of the  defense squad, recalls that about forty LaRouchians "filtered into the hall, some  wearing leather jackets.
They had staves concealed under blankets.
When  Storey started speaking, they stood up and moved forward, putting on brass  knuckles and displaying nunchukas.
" Storey and other speakers were whisked  out the back.
The battle then began in earnest.
Although the NCLC was finally  driven from the hall, six members of the defense squad required treatment.
An unsigned front-page New Solidarity article, "Their Morals and Ours" (named  after an anti-Stalinist treatise by Trotsky), expressed anger at the attitude of  LaRouche's former Trotskyist comrades.
The SWP, the article complained, "has  been saying, 'Smash the Communist Party' for almost forty years, yet when some  left organization proceeds to actually smash the CP, the SWP leaders and  members roll their glazed eyes heavenward, expecting the entire galaxy to fall  upon them.
"   "Their Morals and Ours" revealed the tactical thinking behind Mop Up.
It boasted  that fifty NCLC members could "rout" three hundred CP members and that the  CP would have to mobilize at least six times as many fighters to even become a  "serious obstacle.
"   This bravado strongly resembled the passage in Mein Kampf'\r\ which Hitler,  describing an altercation between Nazis and leftists in a Munich meeting hall in  1 921 , crowed that "our enemies, who must have numbered seven and eight  hundred men, [were] beaten out of the hall and chased down the stairs by my  men numbering not even fifty.
"   "Their Morals and Ours" also said that destroying the CP meant showing that it  was "a 'paper tiger,' rightfully an object of pitying contempt in the eyes of the  working person.
" This idea was further developed in another New Solidarity article: "All those mighty 'Communists' can do is hide behind the nightsticks of the  local police, while publishing tear-jerking accounts of their own casualties.
"   Again, there is a similar formulation in Mein Kampf: "Any meeting which is  protected exclusively by the police discredits its organizers in the eyes of the  broad masses.
... [A] heroic movement will sooner win the heart of a people  than a cowardly one which is kept alive only by police protection.
"   Such parallels did not go entirely unnoticed within the NCLC.
Christine Berl, one  of LaRouche's top disciples (who quit the following year), recalls that she was  assigned to prepare a report for a 1973 NCLC conference on how Hitler built up  the Nazi Party. "
It scared me," she says. "
I began to see it was the very tactics  Lyn was using.
" Berl says that she presented her doubts in the form of a puzzle:  How do we distinguish ourselves from the Nazis?
The audience was unable to  give a clear answer.
New York in 1 973 was hardly comparable to Munich in 1 931 .
There were no  Freikorps veterans and ruined shopkeepers to flock to LaRouche's banner.
And  his street fighters were middle-class intellectuals, not desperate lumpen  proletarians.
Indeed the majority of them were not fighters at all.
Most Mop Up  attacks were carried out by just a few dozen persons.
Even the most enthusiastic  of these became nervous as the CP and SWP fought back, their defense squads  often outnumbering the attackers. "
I pissed blood for a month," recalls a female  NCLC member who was injured while charging a Detroit SWP rally.
The Chicago     regional NCLC sent a memo to New York stating tliat it wasn't strong enougli to  "deal directly" with the CP.
Would the leadership send "defense reinforcements"?
Until such reinforcements arrived, the Chicago organization would keep most of  its activities "low-key or underground," the memo said.
By May, the NCLC  leadership was finding it difficult to whip up enthusiasm for fresh attacks even in  New York.
It is widely believed among leftists that the police in some cities encouraged Mop  Up.
This suspicion is understandable in light of well-documented police  harassment of left-wing groups in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
But former  LaRouchians who participated in Mop Up say they don't recall any police  encouragement.
At the time, the NCLC regarded the police as the enemy, acting  in cahoots with the CP and the SWP to repress the true forces of Revolution.
This view was vehemently expressed in the pages of New Solidarity as the police  cracked down on Mop Up in city after city.
Several NCLC members were  arrested in Philadelphia, including a top LaRouche aide.
More were arrested in  Boston.
In Buffalo felony indictments brought the local Mop Up to a grinding halt.
In New York City two NCLC members were charged with second-degree assault  and possession of a deadly instrument after they attacked black CP leader Ron  Tyson.
One of Tyson's attackers was rearrested a week later for assaulting an  SWP member.
The only evidence of a law enforcement role in Mop Up points not to local police  but to the FBI.
The findings of a federal judge in an SWP lawsuit against the FBI  suggest that once Mop Up was under way, the bureau's New York office  attempted to aggravate it as part of a campaign of anonymous mailings and other  malicious pranks to keep leftist sects at each other's throats.
Federal Judge  Charles D. Breitel of the Southern District of New York reviewed classified FBI  files in 1979 as a court-appointed Special Master acting for plaintiff SWP.
His  report noted that a letter had been sent to the NCLC during Mop Up listing the  names, home telephone numbers, and addresses of SWP members. "
Unless the  Government is prepared to allow disclosure of all information" in the deleted part  of the file, Breitel ruled, "it should be conclusively presumed that the letter was  sent by the FBI . . ."   LaRouche knew just how far he could push Mop Up.
Before the stalemate with  the CP could turn into a rout for his followers, he declared victory and called  everything off.
In fact.
Mop Up did no real political harm to the CP.
A few  meetings were canceled in the first weeks, but thereafter the CP continued its  normal activities behind a screen of defense squads.
However, Mop Up was a  great success for LaRouche.
It induced his followers to believe that those they  had attacked, and who had fought back, were permanently the enemy.
No longer  were non-NCLC leftists seen as rivals within a common Marxist tradition.
They  had become unredeemable devils, traitors to the working class, subhuman police  agents, fascists.
Mop Up thus marked a bizarre new stage in the NCLC's political  evolution — the stage of antifascist fascism.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Four   The Great Manchurian Candidate Scare   In the summer of 1973, LaRouche began sessions of what he called "ego-  stripping.
" He suggested this would cure his followers of the cowardice and  bourgeois moral qualms they had displayed during Mop Up.
The big problem with  most NCLC members, he said, was their psychosexual fears.
LaRouche  proposed to use fear to fight fear:   "I am going to make you organizers — by taking your bedrooms away from you .
.
.
" he announced. "
What I shall do is to expose to you the cruel fact of your sexual  impotence ... I will take away from you all hope that you can flee the terrors of  politics to the safety of 'personal life.'
I shall do this by showing to you that your  frightened personal sexual life contains for you such terrors as the outside world  could never offer you.
I will thus destroy your rabbit-holes, mental as well as  physical.
I shall destroy your sense of safety in the place to which you ordinarily  imagine you can flee.
I shall not pull you back from fleeing, but rather destroy the  place to which you would attempt to flee.
"   The ego-stripping sessions were similar to the confrontational therapy practiced  by psychological cults.
LaRouche would pick an NCLC member at random, or  perhaps one who had failed at some political assignment.
The group would heap  nonstop attacks on every aspect of the victim's behavior.
Supposedly it was a  sign of psychic liberation if he or she broke down and started sobbing  hysterically.
LaRouche said this was the way in which the individual "abruptly  'breaks free' as if from a drugged state; a sudden personality change occurs, in  which the group sees the real person come forth, assume control of himself, or  herself, and bring the ego-state under control.
" Thus ego-stripping was "an act of  social love.
"   Christine Berl, who participated in these sessions, gives a different view.
The so-  called social love, she writes, was "pure psychological terror" and resulted in an  extreme form of "depersonalization.
" The T-group members were "transformed  into sniveling informers vying with each other for [LaRouche's] approval.
Even  couples were encouraged to 'inform' on each other's 'progress,' particularly by  singling out any behavior that could be construed as apolitical, or that was  suspected of being 'resistant' to the aims of the sessions.
"   LaRouche took to calling himself Der Abscheulicher {the Abominable One).
Along with the ego-stripping, he began to instill in his followers an outlook of all-     pervasive paranoia.
In tine unconscious mind, lie warned, tliere lurked dark  forces producing impotence, homosexuality, zombie states, madness.
These "pit  creatures" would destroy anyone who let his or her guard down.
Meanwhile, in  the outside world.
Rockefeller, the CIA, and a vast network of secret agents and  assassins were poised to attack at any moment.
Safety could be attained only by  following LaRouche's every command, replicating his thoughts and remaking  oneself in his image.
Some NCLC members were unconvinced of this, despite their deep admiration  for LaRouche's intellectual abilities.
Matters came to a head in January 1974,  when LaRouche seized upon a fantasy that united the demons of the  unconscious mind and the assassins of the outside world into a single horrifying  vision.
This was the Great Manchurian Candidate Scare, which wiped the slate  clean of skepticism among the members and completed their transformation into  a totalitarian political cult.
The prologue to this momentous event took place in the summer of 1973, when  LaRouche traveled to West Germany to meet with members of the European  Labor Committees, a newly formed NCLC affiliate.
In early August, LaRouchians  in the United States began to read in New Solidarity how Konstantin George, a  member of the German organization, had been drugged and brainwashed by the  East German secret police while visiting a girlfriend in East Berlin.
George had  then been sent back over the wall, so the story went, to spy on the European  Labor Committees and finger LaRouche for assassination by a KGB-CIA hit  team.
The plot was foiled when LaRouche recognized the symptoms of  brainwashing in George's behavior, and deprogrammed him using techniques  "absolutely unprecedented in 'psychological science.'
" The details of these  techniques were not revealed, but NCLC members were warned to be on the  lookout for other brainwashing victims.
The George affair did not unduly alarm the NCLC membership.
Not only was the  story extremely confused, but also a rumor was rampant that George had denied  it all.
Real fear seized the organization only after LaRouche announced the  uncovering of a second zombie — a Manchurian Candidate in every respect —  Christopher White, a twenty-six-year-old NCLC member and British national who  had earned the personal resentment of LaRouche.
In 1972, Carol Schnitzer had  left LaRouche and married White, who was ten years her junior.
The Whites had  withdrawn to London, promising to organize a British NCLC branch.
In December 1 973, LaRouche ordered them to return to New York for an NCLC  year-end conference.
White had good reason to feel nervous about this.
He had  done a poor job of organizing the British branch, and was a prime candidate for  ego-stripping even apart from the love triangle.
During the flight over the Atlantic,  he viewed the film Trinity.
According to his recollection of the plot (in an article he  wrote two months later), the hero has a girlfriend "at least ten years older than  himself.
" She is murdered, and the hero then arranges the execution of a "rather     paternal figure.
" White became increasingly agitated.
When the plane landed, he  began to shout that the CIA was planning to kill both his wife and LaRouche.
Instead of calling a doctor, Carol called LaRouche.
Chris was rushed into a  deprogramming session at LaRouche's apartment.
LaRouche's security aides  and Dr, Gene Inch, a physician and NCLC member, rushed to the scene.
Meanwhile, members from across the country had gathered in New York for the  conference.
The suspense began to mount as alarming rumors emanated from  LaRouche's apartment.
It was said that White had been tortured and  brainwashed in a London basement by the CIA and British intelligence, who had  programmed him first to kill his wife upon the utterance of a trigger word and then  to finger LaRouche for assassination by Cuban exile frogmen.
LaRouche mobilized the entire NCLC.
They passed out fliers on a massive scale  in New York and other cities, describing White's alleged tortures in lurid detail.
The national office issued over forty press releases in a two-week period.
LaRouche and the Whites filed a complaint with the United Nations Commission  on Human Rights and launched a lawsuit against the CIA.
NCLC members  frantically solicited their parents and friends to serve on an Emergency  Commission of Inquiry.
LaRouche's proof for the story was his tapes of the deprogramming.
But New  York Times reporter Paul Montgomery listened to them and gathered only that  White was emotionally distraught. "
There are sounds of weeping and vomiting,"  Montgomery wrote. "
Mr. White complains of being deprived of sleep, food and  cigarettes .... There is also what appears to be an attempt to hypnotize Mr.  White.
" Montgomery wrote that at one point, after White failed to contradict one  of LaRouche's suggestions, LaRouche exclaimed, "Now do you see Carol?
Do  you believe?
" At another point.
White complained of a pain in his arm.
When  LaRouche said the pain was merely part of the "program," White suddenly  shouted: "The pain is real ... I have to tell you what's real and stop this crazy  fantasy world.
Because it's not my fantasy.
"   The NCLC brought in three psychiatrists.
None would substantiate the  Manchurian Candidate story.
Dr. Israel Samuelly suggested that White was  suffering from "schizophrenic catatonia with paranoiac features.
" Most of the  persons listed on the Emergency Commission either quit or said they had never  agreed to serve in the first place.
Within the NCLC, the atmosphere of hysteria was so intense that facts didn't  matter.
LaRouche drilled his followers on what each could expect if kidnapped by  the CIA: "When they really start the heavy programming," he said, "first of all they  give you heavy electric shock, f/eavy electric shock. . . .   "But then, you know what they do to you?
It's not the pain that brainwashes  people.     "
What kills you is when you eat excrement as a way of inducing your torturer to  lay off the pain.
In permitting a bottle to be inserted in your anus and sitting on it  on a chair for hours while interrogation continues, as a way of avoiding greater  pain.
Lying on the floor and whining like a puppy, as a way of getting your  torturers to lay off.
Or permitting yourself to be subjected to homosexual rape,  oral and anal. . . . They say your father was nothing, your father was a queer,  your father was a woman. . . ."   As for the skeptics in his audience, LaRouche cried, "Any of you who say this is a  hoax — you're crudsl You're subhumanl You're not serious.
The human race is at  stake.
Either we win or there is no humanity.
"   New Solidarity followed up with an editorial entitled "Will You Eat Shit for  Rockefeller's CIA?
" It warned that the enemy would use "every form of  degradation known to man.
" During the next few weeks, each NCLC member  was terrified that he or she had been brainwashed.
(LaRouche emphasized that  the victims would have total amnesia about the experience — until the moment of  utterance of the fatal trigger word.)
The leadership was flooded with requests for  deprogramming from those who found themselves harboring vaguely murderous  thoughts about LaRouche.
One member went berserk, screaming, "Cancel me!
Cancel me!
" and had to be hospitalized.
According to LaRouche, this individual's  "code barrier" had gone out of control.
The hysteria prompted the issuance of an "intake procedure" manual by Carol  White. "
The brainwashed comrade's version of events should be taken down,"  Mrs. White wrote, "and particular attention should be paid to his fantasies —  reference to witches, devils, sensitivity to hissing sounds. . ."   Predictably, any member who expressed skepticism became immediately  suspect.
Christine Berl called the story hogwash and withdrew from any active  role in the leadership.
LaRouche said that the CIA, acting through her boyfriend,  had taken over her mind.
A friend warned her that a plot was afoot to kidnap and  deprogram her — to liberate her from her brainwashed condition.
They waited  outside her door, but she didn't come out.
Less fortunate was Alice Weitzman,  also a skeptic, who was held captive in her apartment and forced to listen to  Beethoven at high volume — a deprogramming technique suggested by  LaRouche.
Weitzman managed to throw a note out the window.
A passerby  picked it up and alerted the police.
When officers went to the apartment, they  heard screams, forced their way in, and freed her.
Later that day, they arrested  six NCLC members on kidnapping charges.
(The case was ultimately dismissed  after Weitzman refused to press charges.)
NCLC security chief Jose Torres was another skeptic. "
The spook stuff [went] on  for weeks," he recalls, "and for that time I was the functioning head of the LC  because nobody would do shit.
" Torres decided he'd had enough. "
I [took] Chris  White aside and said, 'Do you know who I am?'
And he said, 'Yes, I know you.'
I     said, 'Look, I'm going to bust you up riglit now if you give me any bullsliit about  being brainwaslied because you weren't brainwaslied so winy tine fuck did you  put us on like this?'
And he said, 'It's too late to turn back now.'
He couldn't back  out now, it was all crap, all of it.
"   Torres says he told LaRouche about this, but LaRouche dismissed it as part of  White's brainwashing.
Torres later concluded that White had known "exactly what  he was doing" and had been motivated by a desire to avoid a psychological  dressing-down.
Says Torres: "White knew how Konstantin George had been  deemed a victim of brainwashing and forgiven.
So why not be brainwashed?
He  did it, and... Lyn... believed him and that was all it took.
... He just kept feeding  Lyn, and Lyn constructs the whole big thing out of it.
"   At the time, an NCLC leaflet described the deprogramming of White as "opening  up a whole new area of psychology — the solution to psychosis.
" But LaRouche  apparently decided in later years that the incident was best forgotten.
His 1979  and 1987 autobiographies, although boastful about his alleged discoveries in  many fields of knowledge, are silent about his cure for psychosis.
Most NCLC defectors agree with Jose Torres that LaRouche appeared genuinely  spooked during the Chris White affair.
They point out that on several later  occasions LaRouche's belief in being a target of assassination seemed to fill an  inner need.
Yet the frequent security alerts to protect LaRouche also serve an  extremely practical goal: They keep the NCLC membership in a state of mindless  hysteria, scrambling frantically to raise money for LaRouche's coffers.
Various articles and speeches at the time by LaRouche and top aides suggested  a high degree of calculated behavior.
fFOOTNOTE 1] Key passages dealt with  the psychological weaknesses of the NCLC membership, their vulnerability to  brainwashing, and the various manipulative techniques that might be used on  them (for instance, playing on fears of homosexuality and triggering an infectious  group paranoia).
Although these methods were described — as in LaRouche's  January 3, 1974 speech — as something the CIA was planning, they bore an  uncanny resemblance to what LaRouche himself was doing to the NCLC  membership.
To brainwash someone (so the LaRouchian theory went), it is first necessary to  "terrorize" him into regarding "the entire world as a police-controlled  environment.
" This was done during the Chris White affair, when many members  believed themselves in imminent danger of being picked up by the CIA and/or the  New York City police for tortures worse than death.
The victim must believe the  entire world is falling apart and that he himself is personally to blame.
This was  also done: NCLC members were told that if they didn't stop the CIA conspiracy,  the entire human race would die — and they\N0u\6 be responsible.
Finally, the  victim must be placed in a controlled environment, an artificial family.
This, too,  corresponds to life in the NCLC.
■     LaRouche also described brainwashing as a system of doubletliink, or metalogic,  by wliicli a person comes to believe that it is not he but the rest of the world that  is brainwashed. "
The victim's sense of reality is turned inside out," he explained.
Christine Berl and Alice Weitzman accused him of brainwashing the  membership, he said, because the CIA had brainwashed them to say this.
The doublethink during the Chris White affair went far beyond anything during  Mop Up.
Thus leading NCLC members who had readily supported Mop Up, such  as Berl and Torres, challenged LaRouche's credibility during the spring of 1974.
They had believed in Mop Up because it possessed at least a veneer of rational  justification: CP members indeed had assaulted NCLC members and spread  exaggerated accusations about them on several prior occasions.
Berl and Torres  thus could convince themselves that the CP was a counterinsurgency force  standing in the way of Revolution.
But the Chris White story had no empirical  basis at all.
It required a leap of faith, not just contorted logic.
NCLC members  with a strong sense of reality found it intolerable.
One by one during 1974 they  defected.
Those who remained were capable of believing in anything LaRouche might  suggest, even neo-Nazism.
[1] LaRouche knew exactly what he was doing, according to Dr. Fred Newman, a  Stanford University-trained logician-turned-Marxist-activist who worked with the  NCLC during the Manchurian Candidate Scare.
Newman was the author of  Explanation by Description (1 968), a study of how we believe what we believe.
After splitting with the NCLC in mid-1974, he wrote a pamphlet analyzing how  LaRouchians believe what LaRouchians believe.
He charged that LaRouche had  a "systematic plan" to transform his followers' ordinary middle-class values into  an explicitly fascist consciousness, chiefly through the generating of an artificial  paranoia at every level of the organization.
(Newman went on to build his own  political cult, the New Alliance Party, which through the years has mimicked  LaRouche's tactics to an uncanny degree.)
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Five   The Beethoven Gang     One would think that the many black, Hispanic, and Jewish members in the  NCLC would have become an embarrassment to LaRouche as he swung to the  ultraright.
But he developed his own unique viewpoint on the relationship  between ethnic minorities and fascism.
In a 1971 essay, still writing from an ostensibly Marxist perspective, LaRouche  tried to imagine how fascism might come to America.
He looked at Rabbi Meir  Kahane's Jewish Defense League, Joe Colombo's Italian-American Civil Rights  League, George Wallace's American Party, and various black-nationalist groups.
These, LaRouche argued, were the germs of a uniquely American fascism.
America is an "ethnic-cultural polyglot," and a powerful fascist base can't be built  on one ethnic community alone.
A successful U.S. fascism must include  multiethnic alliances different from anything in Hitler's lexicon.
LaRouche predicted that the "mutually segregated" ethnic fascist groups would  join with youth from the drug/rock counterculture in a "common front" around a  "populist" cover ideology.
This coalition would launch the "direct street-battle  between socialism and fascism," growing into "the sort of large organization  which U.S. fascism must become to be taken seriously.
"   He was aware that a fascist movement embracing white Christian ethnics, Jews,  blacks, and Hispanics, even in segregated units, would seem to be a strange  combination.
But was it not fascism's nature to unite apparent opposites?
(The  NCLC acted on this principle in later years when it attempted, unsuccessfully, to  unite elements of the KKK, the Black Muslims, the Jewish Defense League, and  mob-linked labor racketeers under its leadership.)
The first application of "ethnic fascism" came in 1973, when the NCLC set out to  organize street-fighting units, fascist in all but name, among black and Hispanic  ghetto youth.
LaRouche first alluded to this idea in his April 1973 speech  announcing Operation Mop Up. "
You think this CP stuff [Mop Up] is scary?
" he  asked. "
Well, I'll tell you something that's really gonna scare you.
In a few months  we're gonna have 10,000 enraged ghetto youth, we're gonna organize street  gangs. . . "   At an NCLC convention in late May he launched the Revolutionary Youth  Movement (RYM), which he said would be a "paramilitary organization" reaching  out to the type of ghetto youth who believe they can "make it as Superfly.
" It  would "cut through" their "hustle" mentality and organize them on the basis of     "what they really feel underneath," their feelings of despair and of "increasingly  pure rage.
" RYM would teach them that rage is not just "robbing the corner candy  store.
" Rage is the determination to "take it all" — to seize control of America in  alliance with other enraged groups.
LaRouche predicted that his message would "spread like wildfire" in the ghetto.
Thousands would join RYM, where they would learn military discipline and  revolutionary theory. "
These youth will be able to debate philosophers," he  boasted.
During that summer and fall, NCLC's small cohort of college-educated blacks,  wearing Black Panther-style leather jackets and sunglasses, fanned out to  Manhattan's Lower East Side, Brooklyn's Bedford-Stuyvesant, Newark's Central  Ward, and other poor neighborhoods.
The message was that gang members  could become "Prometheans" — like Zeke Boyd, a former Panther and the token  black on the NCLC security staff.
LaRouche's organizers developed ties with the Outlaws, reportedly the largest  gang in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
New Solidarity said the Outlaws were a peaceful  bunch attending RYM classes to learn to appreciate classical music.
According to  Christine Berl, this was not entirely accurate. "
I gave the Beethoven class," she  recalls. "
They had guns in the room.
"   The NCLC tried to persuade RYM members to reject the subculture of the  streets.
A black NCLC member told The Village Voice that ghetto youth "spend  their time practicing the jungle boogie. . . . They look like they're masturbating in  public.
I tell these kids I don't want to talk to them until they're human.
" Tolerance  was never the NCLC's strong point.
But like Marine recruits, the RYM members  accepted this drill-instructor message without taking offense.
The leader of the  Outlaws, twenty-one-year-old Tea, said that if RYM was "ever ready to fight the  government and pick up guns, the Outlaws will be right behind them.
"   A former LaRouchian, Dan Jacobs, writes that the RYM project was doomed to  failure because the NCLC was never willing to accept the ghetto youth as  anything more than exotic auxiliaries to stand around and look tough at rallies.
But the New York Police Department was not about to tolerate "red gangs," as  LaRouche called them.
It came down hard on RYM, arresting Tea, Tango, Sly,  Ace, and others on charges including attempted murder, robbery, and illegal  weapons possession.
RYM members also were arrested in Newark and  Philadelphia.
New Solidarity complained in article after article that the arrests  were politically motivated, but the NCLC was politically too isolated to mount an  effective defense.
RYM members became disillusioned and dropped away.
At the same time NCLC members were learning to talk out of both sides of the  mouth.
While RYM organizers urged ghetto youth to "take it all," New Solidarity     editorials sent a very different message to etiinic wliites: "Soon, you will lose your  job — probably to a "welfare loafer,' a methadone-crazed dope-fiend . . . some  gang member brought in from a ghetto neighborhood."
The NCLC also physically  attacked black activists and disseminated blatantly racist propaganda.
This  began during Mop Up, when blacks were priority targets.
A black CP leader was  assaulted on the street near party headquarters in Manhattan.
A CP meeting in  Harlem was terrorized by a contingent wearing hockey helmets.
A meeting of the  Martin Luther King Coalition in Buffalo was attacked by an all-white Mop Up  squad, which beat up several people.
New Solidarity meanwhile carried  headlines such as "CP Turns Rebels into Niggers" and bestowed demeaning  nicknames on black CP members — e.g., "Ron 'Race Riot' Tyson."
In Newark the NCLC targeted poet turned activist Amiri Baraka, who had  attracted national attention by his crusade for black community empowerment.
NCLC members convinced themselves that Baraka was a CIA agent and hence  fair game.
They circulated a pamphlet called Papa Doc Baraka: Fascism in  Newarf<.
This and various New Solidarity articles called him a "gutter dweller," an  "animal," a "mad dog," "Aunt Jemima," and "Superfly."
A cartoon on the  pamphlet's cover portrayed him as a hyena with Negroid lips drooling over a  baby's corpse.
Baraka became the NCLC's Symbolic Black, just as Henry  Kissinger would become its Symbolic Jew.
Baraka's and LaRouche's followers began to fight it out in the streets, much to  the delight of right-wing elements in Newark's white ethnic community led by law-  and-order advocate Anthony Imperiale.
Followers of Imperiale began to echo  some of the NCLC's charges against Baraka, and met with Newark NCLC  members to explore the possibility of joint action.
Individuals claiming to be  affiliated with the Ku Klux Klan also approached NCLC members to express  support.
In September 1973 the NCLC staged an anti-Baraka demonstration that  turned into a slugfest inside the Newark City Council chambers.
Ten NCLC  members were arrested, including Gus Kalimtgis, co-author of the Baraka  pamphlet.
The NCLC developed a plan to take its anti-Baraka campaign nationwide.
"The  country will be saturated with our newspapers, leaflets, with the Baraka  pamphlet, with meetings, forums, press conferences, rallies," boasted New  Solidarity.
It called on "every working class organizer" and "all trade unionists" in  the country to join the fight.
That fall violent clashes between the NCLC and black  nationalists occurred on several campuses.
At Harvard the NCLC security staff  set a trap.
They called a meeting, armed themselves, and waited for members of  the Boston-based Mau Mau to filter into the room.
"A signal was given," said a  former NCLC member.
"Suddenly a sea of nuncliukas rose in the air and came  down."
One of the Mau Mau tried to pull a gun; NCLC members wrestled him to  the floor.
"They beat the shit out of him with sticks, then one of our guys stood  over him with a shotgun while he lay there bleeding.
The rest of the Mau Mau  beat a retreat."
In the summer of 1974 the NCLC tried to whip up public fear of a new black-  nationalist threat: Zebra killers.
In the San Francisco Bay Area, members of a tiny  prison-based cult had killed several whites for ritualistic reasons.
The NCLC, with  no evidence whatsoever, claimed that similar killers were about to erupt into the  streets of New York City from a Bronx drug addiction treatment program run by  leftist doctors.
"You could be white.
You could be black . . ." said an NCLC leaflet  circulated in Manhattan.
"This summer you will be walking down the street with  your family and a cruising car will pull up beside you.
A group of young black  men will jump out of the car and surround you.
As they close in on you, you may  notice that their eyes show no emotion, their pupils are pinpoints.
Your throat will  be slashed, your wife will be stabbed, your children's heads will be smashed  against the pavement.
The attackers will be grinning or laughing."
It is hard to imagine how black NCLC members went along with this.
Sheer  hysteria undoubtedly played a role, but more important was LaRouche's  ideological "refraining" of the NCLC membership's view of racism.
He began, as  he often does, with what seemed to be a valid point: Poverty in black ghettos is  perpetuated by destructive lifestyles and a self-defeating psychology.
Unless  these problems are addressed, the cycle of poverty cannot be ended.
The point  is a commonplace today, but in the early 1970s it was not something most  sociologists or civil rights activists were ready to confront.
LaRouche did confront  it, in striking rhetoric, when he lashed out at "the illusion that the ghetto can  survive by parasitizing on itself."
Black NCLC members thus could fancy he was  the one white radical leader who would never try to patronize them.
White  members could pride themselves on belonging to the single radical party hard-  nosed enough to reject the politics of liberal guilt.
But LaRouche developed no  constructive program from his insights.
He simply used them to bolster the  NCLC's synthetic paranoia: The CIA invented ghetto street culture to control  black youth, jazz is a form of brainwashing.
Black Power advocates are part of  the CIA-Rockefeller plot to set up black America for enslavement and genocide in  concentration camps.
LaRouche thus turned his followers' views on racism and black liberation inside  out.
Black and white NCLC members rushed into the streets to battle Baraka with  a clear conscience, believing they were saving the black community from the  CIA.
They also used epithets like "nigger" and "animal" without any qualms,  telling themselves the terms merely referred to the targeted individual's  enslavement to false values invented by the CIA.
This topsy-turvy logic helped NCLC leaders justify alliances and political  positions they never would have dreamed of in previous years.
In 1974, at the  height of the anti-busing agitation in Boston, they traded intelligence with a leader  of the stridently anti-busing ROAR, based in white ethnic South Boston.
They  also sponsored their own anti-busing congressional candidate in that troubled  community.
This was justified on the logic that busing was a CIA plot to divide the  working class.
In Michigan, NCLC members began meeting witli followers of KKK grand dragon  Robert Miles, who had been convicted of bombing school buses in Pontiac,  Michigan, to protest local busing.
They even nominated the great knight hawk  (sergeant at arms) of Miles's Klan organization, Vernon Higgins, as their 1974  candidate for the Michigan House of Representatives from Pontiac.
Although  Higgins turned out to be an FBI informer, the NCLC was not deterred from further  dealings with Klansmen.
In 1975, members began what would be an eleven-year alliance with Roy  Frankhouser, the Pennsylvania grand dragon and Miles's close friend.
When  Frankhouser went on trial that year in Philadelphia on charges of transporting  stolen explosives to Michigan for associates of Miles, the LaRouchians  sponsored a press conference to support him.
Curiously, the closer the ties the NCLC developed with Klansmen, the more it  downplayed anti-black rhetoric.
Instead, LaRouche moved into an anti-Jewish  mode, attempting to promote anti-Semitism in black as well as white  communities.
The NCLC was not alone in this tactic.
Klan and neo-Nazi leaders  had long recognized the wisdom of tactical alliances with secondary enemies to  concentrate maximum force against the primary enemy.
In the mid-1960s the  neo-Nazi leader George Lincoln Rockwell had suggested an alliance with the  Black Muslims.
Such thinking became more common in the 1970s as anti-  Semitism and anti-Zionism took strong hold in black communities.
When Louis  Farrakhan emerged as America's premier black anti-Semite in the 1980s, he won  the sympathy of many Klansmen and neo-Nazis, including Frankhouser.
But  LaRouche, unlike the Klan, did more than pay lip service to the idea of a black-  white anti-Jewish front.
In 1978 his National Anti-Drug Coalition began massive  propaganda in black communities charging that Jews control the narcotics traffic.
Issuing a warning to black Americans on the "Zionist evil," LaRouche said: "We  [blacks and the NCLC] are poised to destroy this enemy politically, if we  collaborate."
His overtly anti-black campaign of 1973-74 may have been short-lived, but it was  of great importance in the NCLC's development.
It was LaRouche's first really  complicated experiment in ideological reframing — the tactic of changing a  person's emotional response to an idea by changing the context in which it is  communicated.
The anti-black campaign was essentially a dry run for what he  next did to his Jewish followers, leading them step by step to believe that true  liberation for Jews lay in the rejection of everything Jewish.
The NCLC's left-wing  Jews had the typical viewpoint of young leftists of the period: that racism against  blacks is more evil and more worthy of protest than anti-Semitism.
Once they  violated the ultimate leftist taboo by attacking blacks, it was relatively easy to get  them to attack their fellow Jews.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Six   The Jewish Question   When the LaRouchians began reaching out to the Ku Klux Klan and other white  supremacist groups, they justified it as a tactical move.
The main enemy, a 1 975  NCLC internal memorandum argued, was "Rooky's [Nelson Rockefeller's]  fascism with a democratic face" backed by liberals and "social fascists" (non-  NCLC leftists).
The NCLC should "cooperate with the Right to defeat this  common enemy."
There was semantic trickery here.
Not only did the memos lump together neo-  Nazis with conservatives in an amorphous right (thus sanitizing the former), but  also groups traditionally opposed to fascism were tarred with the fascist label.
It  was the same logic used by Stalin in the early 1930s when he told the German  Communists to cooperate with Hitler on the ground that the Social Democrats  were the main enemy.
(The term "social fascist" was first coined by the Stalinists  to express this idea.)
The 1975 memo also argued that organizing on the right would bring the NCLC  large financial contributions, allies with real influence, and new recruits.
After the  Revolution it would be "comparatively easy" to crush those who refused to be  recruited.
The memo divided the "right wing" into "pro-Rocky" and "anti-Rocky" factions  (i.e., pro- and anti-big business).
The "pro-Rocky" side included William F.  Buckley and other alleged big business penetration agents.
The "anti-Rocky"  side appeared to include the various Klansmen and neo-Nazis who had  expressed interest in the NCLC.
The implication was that these anti-Rocky  rightists could be a positive force for social progress.
Some LaRouchians sincerely believed this, but the NCLC leadership was  preparing itself for an ideological shift rather than merely a tactical one.
The  previous year the NCLC had developed an important friend in neo-Nazi circles —  Ken Duggan, editor of The Illuminator.
Duggan met regularly with NCLC security  staffers, especially Scott Thompson, and urged them to move further to the right.
Duggan was soon arrested for stabbing a political rival, and was convicted of  attempted murder.
While awaiting sentencing at Rikers Island, the New York City  detention center, he used a bed sheet to hang himself from a light fixture.
But  during his brief relationship with the LaRouchians he introduced them to a  number of contacts and potential allies, the most important being Willis Carto.
Carlo, founder of the Liberty Lobby, was by far the most successful and  influential American anti-Semite of the1970s.
He was an intellectual disciple of  the late Francis Parker Yockey, who roamed Europe and North America in the  1950s futilely attempting to build an underground movement.
Carto met Yockey  only once — in San Francisco in 1960, when Yockey was in jail awaiting trial for  possession of false passports.
Several days after their meeting, Yockey  committed suicide in his cell by taking cyanide.
Carto, already an ultrarightist,  dedicated himself to carrying out Yockey's mission to save Western civilization.
This mission was set forth in Yockey's Imperium, a 600-page synthesis of Nazi  racialism and Oswald Spengler's philosophy of history.
The book was dedicated  to the "Hero of the Second World War" (Hitler).
But Carto, although devoted to  Yockey's ideas, had no illusions about Yockey's tactics.
Instead of engaging in  inept conspiracies, he concentrated on building a political movement and  developed a populist cover ideology.
Although he discreetly sold Mein Kampfand  The Protocols of the Elders ofZion by mail, he publicly denied being either a  Nazi or an anti-Semite — he was merely "anti-Zionist."
Carto defended Hitler's heritage not by saying the Holocaust had been a good  thing, but by denying that it ever took place.
He founded the Institute for  Historical Review to prove that the alleged murder of six million Jews was a hoax  invented by Zionists to make people feel sorry for them.
Carto went so far as to  publicize a theory that the gas ovens at Auschwitz were really just an industrial  facility for converting coal into oil, operated by happy well-fed Jewish prisoners.
Carto's Liberty Lobby, based in Washington, D.C., and nominally headed by  Colonel Curtis B. Dall (a former son-in-law of President Franklin D. Roosevelt),  enjoyed friendly ties with conservative congressmen.
It published a weekly  tabloid.
The Spotlight, which by 1979 enjoyed a paid circulation of almost  200,000.
Its articles championed income-tax rebels, protested the plight of family  farmers, and promoted quack cancer cures such as laetrile.
Its favorite political  targets included the Rockefellers, the Rothschilds, Henry Kissinger, the Council  on Foreign Relations, and the "Zionist entity" in Palestine.
As early as 1975, Carto chatted frequently with Scott Thompson, and LaRouche  himself visited Liberty Lobby headquarters to meet with Colonel Dall.
A multi-  leveled collaboration soon developed between the two organizations.
They  shared intelligence on various targets, including William F. Buckley and Resorts  International.
The Spotlight published articles by Thompson and other NCLC  members writing under pen names.
It also sold LaRouchian tracts through its  mail-order service.
An initial point of agreement was on the need to expose the Rockefellers.
However, Carto believed the NCLC hadn't cast its conspiracy nets wide enough.
A 1976 Spotlight review of an NCLC report on terrorism complained that the  NCLC still failed to recognize the role of the Jewish bankers.
LaRouche received     the message loud and clear.
A wave of articles in New Solidarity blamed the  Rothschilds and other Jewish bankers for a wide range of crimes, including the  assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
A 1977 piece by LaRouche admitted the  Liberty Lobby had been ahead of the NCLC in identifying the main enemy.
(LaRouche subsequently met with Carto in Wiesbaden.
Questioned about this  meeting during a 1984 deposition, LaRouche recalled that they had discussed  "the Jewish question" as well as the "abomination" of America's postwar  occupation of Germany.)
The NCLC also developed ties with persons on the fringes of the Liberty Lobby.
Mitchell WerBell III, a friend of Carto, became LaRouche's security adviser.
Colonel Tom McCrary, a Georgia rightist often praised in The Spotlight,  accompanied Gus Kalimtgis on a national speaking tour.
Edward von Rothkirch,  a Liberty Lobby contact who ran a small press service in Washington and had  once threatened to sue the LaRouchians for appropriating his firm's name, now  became friendly.
Several leaders of the American Agricultural Movement, a  group championed by The Spotlight, began to work with the LaRouchians on  farm issues.
By the time LaRouche launched his 1980 presidential campaign, he  felt free to call himself the candidate of The Spotlight's readership, which he  hailed as the quarter million strong "'Gideon's Army' of American nationalism."
LaRouche's own "nationalism" had taken a quantum leap after he went to  Wiesbaden in 1977 to straighten out the German organization and romance a  young woman named Helga Zepp.
While in Wiesbaden he became fearful of left-  wing terrorists.
He hunkered down in his villa and did some hard thinking.
When he returned to the United States late that year, with Helga as his bride, the  war on Jews began in earnest.
New Solidarity and other NCLC publications  started to be full of attacks on wealthy Jewish families, B'nai B'rith, Zionism, the  State of Israel, the American "Jewish Lobby" and the Jewish religion.
New  Solidarity published crude anti-Semitic jokes as well as articles suggesting that  Zionists were a kind of subhuman species.
Actually LaRouche and some of his followers had ruminated along these lines  even in their leftist days.
In a 1973 article, "The Case of Ludwig Feuerbach,"  LaRouche argued that the Jewish religion is a fossilized reflection of the life in  ancient and medieval times of the Jewish "merchant-usurer."
The Jew of that  epoch was a wretch who "had not yet evolved to the state of Papal  enlightenment, a half-Christian, who had not developed a Christian conscience."
Today's Jew is no better.
His culture is "merely the residue left to the Jewish  home after everything saleable has been marketed to the Goyim."
Any religious  feelings today's Jew may have are nothing but "infantile object elation."
LaRouche also offered an anti-Semitic brand of psychoanalysis: "The brutally  sadistic moral castration of the Jewish boy by the domineering 'Jewish mother' is  the basis for one of the most horrifying models of male sexual impotence ... the  'business Jew.' "
Following this article, The Campaigner published an anti-Israel tirade by Nancy  Spannaus, one of LaRouche's top aides.
The Israelis, she wrote, have a  "psychotic" fear of anti-Semitism.
In particular Jerusalem's Orthodox Jews are  "crazed with the fear of death" and thus engage in "frightful orgies of sex and  violence."
Their religion is only the "thinnest disguise for exacerbated peasant  paranoia."
LaRouche's 1974 tirade against the Jews was buried in a footnote.
Many NCLC  members passed over it.
Others thought it was just LaRouche engaging in  provocative remarks to help his Jewish followers confront their personal hang-  ups.
As for Spannaus's remarks, everyone knew she was a difficult personality.
But the anti-Semitic agitation which began in 1977-78 was much more difficult to  ignore or rationalize.
It was not just a footnote or personal aberration; it was a  systematic expression of hatred, revulsion, and scorn targeting every aspect of  Jewish history, culture, religion, and home life.
[FOOTNOTE 1]   How could the Jewish members of the NCLC — at that time, a quarter of the  membership — let this pass without expressing outrage?
Defectors say that many  members either didn't hear the message or simply tuned it out.
They were  working on the streets or in LaRouche business enterprises sixteen hours a day.
Many of them were too exhausted to read New Solidarity.
Those who did read it  were in such a state of hysteria — mobilizing for the latest NCLC campaign to  prevent imminent nuclear war — that the message didn't register.
Former NCLC member Linda Ray, in her 1986 article "Breaking the Silence,"  describes another factor — the NCLC habit of knee-jerk rationalization.
Ray, who  is Jewish, says that whenever anyone tried to tell her the NCLC was anti-Semitic,  she instantly denied it, pointing to supposedly anti-Nazi statements in New  Solidarity.
She recalls reading in New Solidarity about LaRouche's concept of a  subhuman oligarchical species.
"Although I knew it did not make scientific sense,  I presumed that it was a deep intellectual metaphor that was over my head."
Years later a friend showed her a New Solidarity article in which the Star of David  was used to symbolize the drug trade.
"I quickly replied ... 'It is just a graphic arts  symbol' — which I had naively thought for years.
But as soon as I said it out loud I  realized that I sounded ridiculous.
It was as if I was waking from a nightmare."
Ray's article explains the state of mind of many NCLC rank-and-filers.
It does not  explain the acquiescence of the NCLC national and regional leadership cadre,  many of them Jewish, who helped develop the anti-Semitic line and implemented  it with alacrity.
Here, as during Mop Up and the Chris White affair, a few rebelled  but most bowed to LaRouche's will.
Kevin Coogan, a member of the intelligence staff, did some background research  on Carto and the Liberty Lobby.
Shocked by what he discovered, he quit.
Several  other members of the national office staff also resigned.
They prepared unsigned  reports and met privately with journalists, stating that the NCLC had become an     anti-Semitic organization and tliat LaRouclie was espousing Nazi ideas.
But  none were willing to go public against LaRouche.
Security staffer Bob Cohen played a key role in stirring up the discontent.
He met  with several trusted comrades to point out the similarities between LaRouche's  writings and Mein Kampf.
But when his friends decided to quit, Cohen backed  out.
His reverence for LaRouche kept him in the organization until 1981.
Cohen's brother-in-law and fellow security staffer, Paul Goldstein, came back  seething from a trip down South with LaRouche.
The hulking former college  athlete had been present, as LaRouche's bodyguard, when anti-Semitic jokes  were traded among the good old boys.
Goldstein, former friends say, was almost  ready to quit.
But the leadership put him through an ego-stripping session led by  Helga LaRouche.
The session focused on his alleged sexual fantasies, and he  was told his wife would be ordered to leave him if he didn't shape up.
Goldstein,  reduced to tears, capitulated totally.
Thereafter, he was one of LaRouche's most  loyal followers.
A few more NCLC members protested when LaRouche announced that only one  and a half million Jews, not six million, were killed in the Holocaust.
Contemptuously ignoring his followers' complaints, he issued a press release  reaffirming the 1 .5 million figure.
By 1980-81 the protest over LaRouche's anti-Semitism died down.
Most NCLC  members who subsequently quit did so for personal reasons, not over matters of  principle.
Unlike earlier defectors, most would do nothing to oppose LaRouche.
Don and Alice Roth charged in a resignation letter that the membership had  undergone a process of "moral anaesthetization."
They cited a joke that they said  had become popular in the national office: "How many Jews can you fit into a  Volkswagen?
One hundred.
Four on the seats and ninety-six in the ashtray."
In psychological terms the anti-Semitism that seized the NCLC in the late 1970s  was similar to the violent fantasies that gripped it during Operation Mop Up.
Instead of assaulting Communists with nunchukas, the NCLC now attacked Jews  via brutally worded propaganda tracts.
Once again LaRouche helped his  followers overcome their moral qualms by reframing reality for them through  semantic tricks and false syllogisms.
The resulting belief structure involved four layers: a redefinition of "Jew," a  redefinition of "Nazi," a denial of the concepts of "left" and "right" in politics (to  totally disorient the believer), and, for Jewish LaRouchians, a guilt trip and  special fears.
To redefine the meaning of "Jew," LaRouche concocted a distinction between  real and false Jews.
He said his political attacks were not aimed at all Jews, just  those who advocate evil policies like Zionism.
Using Orwellian semantics, he     called the latter "nominal Jews," the "Jews who are not Jews."
Who then are the  real Jews?
LaRouche said they are the Jewish members of a "humanist" faction  drawing its inspiration from Philo of Alexandria, a first-century Jewish  Neoplatonist,   Here LaRouche was at his wiliest.
For Philo has no following in modern Judaism.
His only professed followers are LaRouche's own NCLC members, whose  interpretation of Philo bears little relation to the latter's actual writings.
The bogus nature of the "real Jew" faction was further revealed in LaRouche's  polemics against the "unremitting evil" of Zionism.
To be a real Jew, he  suggested, one must repudiate the State of Israel, Zionism, and the mainstream  leadership of the Jewish community.
But a sizable minority of Jews is already  anti-Zionist and estranged from the mainstream Jewish leadership — e.g., some  of the Hassidim and many secular Jewish leftists.
Are they "real Jews"?
Not at  all.
In LaRouchian propaganda the Hassidim are depicted as evil cultists while  leftist Jews appear as dope-pushing terrorists.
In the final analysis the Jewish  members of the LaRouche organization — a few score individuals — are the only  real Jews in the world!
LaRouche redefined what a Nazi is in tracts such as "The Truth About 'German  Collective Guilt'" and "Hitler: Runaway British Agent."
He argued that Hitler was  put into power by the Rothschilds and other wealthy Jews-who-are-not-really-  Jews.
These evil oligarchs invented Nazi racialism and brainwashed the Nazis to  accept it.
They then urged Hitler and his cronies to persecute the German Jews  so the latter would flee to Palestine, where the Rothschilds had decided to set up  a zombie state as a tool of their world domination.
But as this scenario unfolded,  the German people developed their own agenda: a "sound and intense . . .  nationalist enthusiasm" to invade Britain (the Rothschild headquarters).
Hitler at  first acquiesced in this desire, but unfortunately he was ideologically weak — he  backed off and returned to the puppet masters' game plan by attacking the Soviet  Union.
Thus did LaRouche place the ultimate blame for Hitler's crimes on the  Jews-who-are-not-Jews-but-really-are-the-Jews-anyway.
LaRouche didn't deny that Hitler and the Nazis were partly responsible for many  horrendous crimes as the Rothschilds' junior accomplices.
But he instructed  NCLC members to focus on a newer and deadlier plot.
The Rothschilds and  other "British" families — and the Israelis — were preparing to launch a Holocaust  a hundred Wmes worse than Hitler's.
This new Holocaust was aimed at  consolidating "British" power, and would involve the death of billions of human  beings via nuclear war, plagues, famine, and a New Dark Age — horrors that  would make the "Nazi thing" seem like a "slight mistake."
The New Dark Age  conspirators were "a hundred times worse" than Hitler, and anyone collaborating  with them (like Jimmy Carter) was also a hundred times worse.
With his followers thus confused, LaRouche was able to switch labels on his  concepts.
The New Dark Age conspirators were not only far worse than the  Nazis of the Hitler era, they were Nazis.
The real Nazis were the hundred-times-  worse Nazis.
Menachem Begin was a Nazi, Ariel Sharon was a Nazi, the "Jewish  Lobby" in America was "Nazi."
It followed from this re-labeling that anyone who opposed Israel and the "Jewish  Lobby" was, objectively, anfz-Nazi.
LaRouche's followers thus ended up with a  topsy-turvy view in which the real Nazis were seen as anti-Nazis, and anti-  Semitism was perceived as a moral necessity — to "save" the Jews from  themselves.
The LaRouchians accordingly worked seven days a week to build a  fascist movement while imagining they were building an antifascist movement.
LaRouche had used their fears of fascism to further fascist goals.
There was always the possibility that some NCLC members would wake up and  begin to critically examine these Orwellian labels.
Stage three guarded against  such a possibility.
In "The Secrets Known Only to the Inner Elites," LaRouche  announced that the left and the right in politics don't really exist.
They are a  fiction concealing the struggles of two conspiratorial elites — the humanist elite  (LaRouchians or proto-LaRouchians) and the oligarchical elite (the Jews-who-  are-not-Jews, etc.).
Hence, in judging a given party or faction one should not ask  where it stands on the political spectrum, but which elite is manipulating it.
Depending on the answer, there are good Communists and bad Communists,  good conservatives and bad conservatives, good Klansmen and bad Klansmen.
During World War II there were good Nazis (the Wehrmacht) and bad Nazis (the  Rothschild agents-of-influence in the Nazi Party leadership).
With the traditional political spectrum abolished, LaRouche's followers no longer  had to deal with the glaring contradictions between their old leftist and new  fascist politics.
For all intents and purposes, the NCLC's political past no longer  existed.
Fascism and communism no longer existed.
All that mattered were  LaRouchism and anti-LaRouchism, which were whatever LaRouche said they  were.
When LaRouche first promulgated these views in the late 1970s, he played on  his Jewish followers' guilt feelings, their anxiety over their possible tainted status  in the NCLC, and their nightmares about the Holocaust.
In a 1978 article on the  "cult origins of Zionism," he warned the NCLC Jews: If you don't put aside your  doubts and totally devote yourself to our political goals, you are "just as guilty" as  Adolf Hitler.
Indeed, you are more guilty, since the consequences of an NCLC  failure to take power will be human death on a far greater scale than under Hitler.
But I know you: Underneath your veneer of loyalty to the NCLC you still have a  residual sense of loyalty to your fellow Jews — the false Jews.
Insofar as you feel  that residual loyalty, you are "on the pathway to becoming a Nazi" — a supporter  of the evil oligarchy's plan to kill off two-thirds of the human race.
Forget your  narrow bestial ethnic loyalties!
Instead ask yourself: "What is a Jew good for?
What can a Jew contribute to humanity generally which obliges humanity to value  the Jew?"
LaRouche used even sterner language to warn his Jewish followers of the  possible consequences of disloyalty: "You have no right to hide behind the  whimpering, morally degraded profession [of excuses]. . . . Either you take  responsibility for the ultimate consequences of your conduct or you have no  moral right to complain against whatever evil the world's developments bestow  upon you."
To get the full flavor of this threat, one must understand that, in 1978, many  NCLC members fervently believed that LaRouche would soon take power in  America.
Jewish members thus could easily have felt worried — at least on a  subliminal level — for their own safety.
[1] A sampling from NCLC publications, much of it written by LaRouche: Early  Jewish settlers in America were prominent in the slave trade.
Those who came  over in the early twentieth century became the founders of organized crime,  rising to power through rum running, drug pushing, and pornography.
Their  corrupting influence was supplemented by that of Viennese refugees in the  1930s — an intellectual "cholera culture" and "intellectual pus" undermining  American values.
Their chief organization, the B'nai B'rith, resurrected the  "tradition of the Jews who demanded the crucifixion of Jesus Christ, the Jews  who pleaded with Nero to launch the 'holocaust' against the Christians."
They  manipulated the U.S. government, against its best interests, to support the  "kosher nostra" government of Israel.
Also they founded the Zionist Lobby, "the  most visible of the internal enemies of the United States — and of the human  race."
The policies of the Zionist Lobby are "pure evil."
Any American "professing  Zionist loyalties" is, by definition, "a national security risk."
As for Israel itself, it is  a "zombie-nation" and follows policies "a hundred times worse than Hitler."
Its  denizens display a "nauseating Jewish hypocrisy over the murder of one of their  children" while "bellow[ing] and belch[ing] in smug contentment every time  hundreds of thousands of . . . Palestinians are butchered."
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
PART TWO: What LaRouche Wants   " The war in which I am presently engaged against the forces of the  Whore of Babylon . . . is not a war merely for some particular policy,  but a battle for that Great Design under which sovereign nations  dedicated to generalized scientific and technological progress form  a powerful alliance to crush the remaining power of the oligarchist  faction, to rid our planet of that faction."
—LYNDON H. LAROUCHE, JR., The Power of  Reason, 1979   Chapter Seven  The Grand Design   In the early 1970s LaRouche bolstered his followers' morale with fantasies of an  insurrection that would soon put them in power.
Select NCLC members were  sent to a secret boot camp near Argyle, New York, to study riflery, the use of  explosives, and small-arms tactics.
One of the former instructors, Gregory Rose,  said they learned "how to take this hill, that hill."
They also played Capture the  Flag.
Members not attending the camp participated in local NCLC "militias."
Former NCLC member Linda Ray recalled: "We were each handed a pole.
We  were told we were preparing for class warfare.
We practiced marching in circles."
A top LaRouche aide produced a study of Tito's World War II partisans as the  prototype for LaRouche's army.
Relevant intelligence was collected, such as on  the troop strength and readiness of California's National Guard.
As the NCLC moved to the right, the idea arose of winning over military officers  to help LaRouche achieve power.
U.S. Army intelligence reports reveal that in  the mid-1970s NCLC members began calling and sending suggestive memos to  high-ranking officers.
For instance, Ron Kokinda called the XVIII Airborne Corps  commander at Fort Bragg in 1976 to warn him that a Carter victory in the  presidential election would pose a threat to the Republic.
Kokinda also sent a  letter to General Frederick C. Weyand, the Army Chief of Staff, claiming that  Carter and the Wall Street bankers were plotting to destroy the Constitution.
The  way to stop them, he advised, was to crush Wall Street's "command structure"  and undertake a massive "economic reorganization."
NCLC security staffers sought out officers with strong political views, such as  Major General John K. Singlaub, removed as commander of U.S. forces in Korea  in 1977 after criticizing President Carter's defense policies.
Singlaub recalls being     approached when he was stationed at Fort McPherson in Georgia: "They said,  'You military people are going to be the savior of the country. . . . We want to  work closely with you.' "
Singlaub cut them off and denounced them in press  interviews.
(In a 1983 letter to this author, he compared them to the Nazis and  said they were one of the most dangerous extremist groups in America.)
According to former NCLC members, the national office staff was briefed in May  1979 on how a military coup would make LaRouche dictator.
The NCLC's "right-  wing allies" supposedly would bring this about sometime before the 1980  election.
Meanwhile in a campaign speech LaRouche called for the abolition of  democracy and alluded to a plan for a march on Washington.
The context  suggested something like Mussolini's 1922 march on Rome.
Whatever LaRouche might tell his followers to feed their sense of self-  importance, he knew he could only establish his dictatorship if a "leading strata of  capitalists and governmental agencies" were willing to sponsor it.
For this, a  major crisis would be necessary.
As the signs of such a crisis multiplied, a faction  of the capitalists would begin to call for new leadership.
A coalition would emerge  of Midwestern industrialists, technocrats, the Teamsters union, military officers,  and dissident CIA agents to win over the silent majority and isolate the nation's  "liberal third."
NCLC advisers would permeate the coalition and coordinate its  efforts.
But LaRouche cautioned his followers to let their prospective allies take  the lead at first, while the NCLC built up its independent political base.
LaRouche thought he recognized the seeds of the impending crisis in the  international monetary system.
The Third World and Eastern Europe had run up  hundreds of billions of dollars in debts to Western banks.
Many debtor countries  were hard-pressed to pay the interest, to say nothing of the principal, and the  total debt was mounting steadily.
What if just one major debtor nation decided to  default?
LaRouche predicted a "chain-reaction collapse" of the debt structure  leading to "a depression far worse than that of the 1 931-33 period."
The only way  out would be for "someone in a leading position in the U.S.A." to override the  greed of the bankers and bring the nation "back to its senses."
LaRouche's  grandiose tone suggested that this "someone" would be himself.
LaRouche urged the formation of a debtors' cartel and a don't-pay strategy.
His  followers toured Latin America, contacting hundreds of government officials,  labor leaders, and military officers.
They produced dozens of research studies  and propaganda tracts, and LaRouche himself wrote Operation Juarez {^982), a  brilliant call to arms against the International Monetary Fund austerity programs.
The small LaRouchian parties in Mexico, Peru, and Colombia gained access to  high government officials.
LaRouche became known in Latin America as a  serious economist and political strategist.
He met with Presidents Jose Lopez  Portillo of Mexico and Raul Alfonsin of Argentina.
A delegation of his followers  met with Peru's president, Alan Garcia, in Lima.
Fighting the IMF meanwhile  became a continent-wide demagogic rallying cry.
Tens of thousands of students     marched against the IMF in Buenos Aires.
Fidel Castro seized on the issue and  developed his own version of Operation Juarez.
But no Latin American leader  was willing to take the final step — actual default as opposed to rhetorical  threats — that might cut off the credit keeping their economies afloat.
LaRouche  wasn't discouraged, however.
He still believed the catastrophe was only a few  years away and that he alone would know how to save civilization.
He called his  long-range plan, to be implemented once he took power, the Grand Design for  Humanity.
The Grand Design was based, like his plan for triggering the debt bomb, on an  anti-Semitic conspiracy theory.
LaRouche claimed that the world is dominated by  a Zionist oligarchy — a cabal of international usurers — with headquarters in  London.
In The Power of Reason he stated that he was fighting to restore  sovereignty to the United States and other key nations so they could "rid our  planet" of this oligarchy, so that mankind could create the social conditions for  the next step in evolution: the super race of "golden souls."
LaRouche said that  creating this super race was the true objective of his life.
The Grand Design is the key to all of LaRouche's multileveled efforts, including  his amassing of great wealth.
In working out its details, he became the first  systematic thinker in the history of international fascism to deal with the state, the  economy, culture, race, military strategy, and a host of tactical questions within a  consistent philosophical framework.
This tour de force contains genuine insights  on many questions and borrows from LaRouche's major achievement in  economics — his model of a totally mobilized economy.
The Grand Design is  embodied in a score of articles and books, including The Case of Walter  Lippmann (1977).
As reworked for popular consumption in various propaganda  tracts, it has exerted a subterranean influence on ultra-rightists from Argentina  through West Germany.
Given the uniqueness of this body of ideas — the fact that  they fill a void in international fascism — it is inevitable that LaRouche's ideological  influence will continue for years, even if he should die tomorrow.
The Grand Design begins with a total rejection of "British liberal notions of  'democracy,' " notions which are "like a farm without a farmer, in which the  chickens, sheep, cows, horses and pigs form 'constituencies.' "
His own humanist  republic would have "nothing to do with elections, parliaments, or such  differentia," but would ruthlessly suppress all "nonrepublican" (i.e., non-  LaRouchian) influences.
The American people wouldn't lose anything, because  our democracy is merely a fagade for an already existing dictatorship of the  "monetarist faction" — i.e., the oligarchy.
LaRouche would replace this bad  dictatorship with a good one — a "class dictatorship-in-fact" of the industrial  capitalists, with labor leaders like the Teamsters as junior partners to provide a  "broader social base."
Within this dictatorship the interests of capital and labor  would be "understood to be identical," and strikes by labor unions would not be  tolerated.
But the capitalists would not actually run their own "dictatorship-in-fact."
A special  elite that has mastered the "humanist" (LaRouchian) philosophy would take  command.
These favored few would have exclusive power to shape the laws of  the new order — laws aimed at curbing the selfish tendencies of society's "less  moral strata" — and they would not tolerate any "direct violation of humanist  outlook and methods" even from capitalists.
To make this palatable, LaRouche adopted Big Brother's "freedom is slavery"  slogan, only phrased more arcanely.
Freedom has nothing to do with tolerating  "violations of universal law" (i.e., of LaRouche's will).
Freedom is "exactly the  opposite"; it is the "abhorrence of such error."
In other words, freedom is the  abhorrence of freedom.
LaRouche's "freedom" would involve total control over the individual's innermost  thoughts.
He distinguishes between thoughts "which lead to increasing human  perfection — which we call good," and thoughts "which abort progress or worse —  which we call evil."
His Republic would "mobilize the good within the individual  citizen to rule over the evil within himself."
The individual citizen would have little  choice to do otherwise.
The state "does not 'concede' freedom to the individual,  but demandsXhaX he or she partake of it in the general interest of the state. . ."  Anyone who refuses to go along "has no consciously defensible premise on  which to say to his fellows: 'I have a right to live as a free man.' "
LaRouche would revise the criminal justice system to reflect this.
No longer  would a criminal be someone who commits criminal acts; it would be anyone who  thinks criminal thoughts.
Such thoughts would include putting one's own interests  and those of one's family above the interests of the Republic.
"Every citizen who  holds the view, 'I can't worry about society and the world; I must attend to my  family responsibilities,' is exhibiting a degree of relative infantilism tending in the  direction of the criminal mind," says one LaRouchian manifesto.
Indeed, such a  mentality not only tends toward criminality, it is criminal.
LaRouche's system of government would require immediate purges of any  opposition.
The police would be empowered to conduct "surgically precise  preventive action."
The first target would be the Jews and others who operate as  agents of the London-based oligarchy, LaRouche describes the conspiracy as a  four-tiered ziggurat of (from the top down) Jewish bankers on Wall Street, Jewish  community leaders, Jews and pro-Jewish Gentiles in the government and media,  and finally the gutter networks of Communists, environmentalists, and peaceniks.
This conspiracy has kept the nation subservient to London, enabling "speculative  capital" to bleed dry "industrial capital" through usury.
The influence of the  conspirators dates back to Benedict Arnold and is so deeply rooted that only a  complete purge can restore the nation's sovereignty.
As a New Solidarity editorial  put it, "America must be cleansed for its righteous war by the immediate  elimination of the Nazi Jewish Lobby . . . from the councils of government,  industry and labor."
(Note the Orwellian use of the word "Nazi.")
A second     editorial called for an FBI task force to "root out the cancer in the American body  politic that is the so-called Zionist Lobby."
The task force would include a  "permanent Special Prosecutor's office."
Jewish leaders would be investigated  and their organizations "dismantled or registered as foreign agents."
A special  congressional committee would "clean out Senators and Congressmen who  maintain their covert relationships with Zionist spies."
Anyone who opposed this  would be "branded as a traitor."
The Zionist "octopus" would be "eliminated" at all  costs.
Such appears to be LaRouche's program for a fascist state: dictatorship by the  party elite, a purge of the "Zionists," suppression of all opposition, brainwashing-  style pressure on those who refuse to internalize the party elite's ideology, denial  of citizenship to subhumans, and revisions in the criminal code to make it all  "legal."
The Grand Design's next stage is the "total mobilization of the entire  nation" in preparation for Total War.
The Nazis used the term "total mobilization" to discuss Germany's war economy,  but LaRouche believes they never understood the idea.
They simply looted until  there was nothing left to loot, and then went under.
Real total mobilization means  ever-expanding scientific discovery, technological innovation, and industrial  investment.
And these must expand /aster than the needs of the war machine.
But LaRouche certainly agreed with the Nazis that total mobilization requires a  centralized, disciplined economy.
Scientific and technological progress cannot be  left to "British" free enterprise.
LaRouche envisioned an economy dominated by a  cluster of giant "brute-force" projects with his humanist elite cracking the whip.
He often cited the Apollo Project and the Manhattan Project, but his chief model  seemed to be Hitler's Peenemunde rocket center, where the V-2 rockets were  developed that then were manufactured by slave laborers at underground plants.
The cost of such projects would be offset by the "spin-offs" — new civilian-sector  products, cheap new sources of energy like fusion power, and miraculous gains  in productivity.
These in turn would produce more resources for the military  economy.
The key to the ever-expanding military potential would be the "creative powers of  the mind," mobilized via fanaticism to serve the Grand Design.
To encourage  such creative powers — especially the ability to invent and master advanced  military technologies — the educational system would be completely transformed.
Children would be taught NCLC "humanism" as well as "classical German"  doctrines.
They would also be taught the "hypothesis of the higher hypothesis,"  LaRouche's own method of insight (one thinks about how one thinks while one  thinks).
As many children as possible would be transformed into Wernher von  Braun-type geniuses.
Thus the rate of innovation in science and technology  would accelerate through the roof, and the speedy adoption of the most useful  innovations would be guaranteed by the educational machine churning out  millions of engineers and skilled technicians — the high-tech force to operate     weapons systems of ever-increasing complexity.
Tine young scientists,  engineers, and teclinicians would be Spartan-type "soldier-citizens," led by  "engineer-officers," thoroughly dedicated to the mobilization process.
They would  be the cutting edge of armed forces vastly expanded through Universal Military  Training (not just the draft) into an invincible "pyramid of maximum in-depth war-  fighting capabilities."
Of course, there is one thing missing from this Star Wars fascism.
The soldier-  citizens wouldn't be Germans.
But they would memorize Schiller's poetry, listen  to Beethoven night and day, and master classical German philosophy as well as  emulating the V-2 scientists.
Even today, NCLC publications suggest they revere  their Teutonic heritage and the alleged critical role played by Germany (not  England) in founding the real America — and hence regard America as having  special ties with Germany transcending those with any other NATO ally.
The ultimate aim of LaRouche's total mobilization would be world conquest.
As  LaRouche said in 1978, he would be the President who would win wars.
He  would lead the nation in establishing the "permanent hegemony of the  Neoplatonic-humanist [LaRouchian] forces over the globe."
The oligarchical  "forces of evil" would be crushed everywhere, bringing the nations under "firm-  handed (if loving)" rule.
The "progressive liquidation" of oligarchist regimes would  not end until "total victory" — the crushing of the world's "last bastion of  oligarchical policy."
Just as LaRouche took issue with Hitler's version of total mobilization, so he  criticized the Nazi leader's military strategy of waging a two-front war against  both the West and the Soviet Union.
Hitler should have mopped up the  Rothschilds' headquarters, Britain, before marching east.
The London blitz was  not carried out boldly enough.
LaRouche here makes explicit his Nazi  sympathies.
The war on Britain was an expression of Germany's "republican-  nationalist impulse," and the enthusiasm to crush Britain was "sound."
Britain  was "then, as now, the enemy of continental Europe, including the German  nation."
Hitler was "London's most deadly enemy" (hence by implication he was  Europe's hero in spite of his mistakes).
LaRouche would do things right, one stage at a time.
The United States should  plan first for a war against Britain, not the Soviet Union, There must be a "total  elimination of Britain's worldwide political, economic, and military leverage."
If it  doesn't surrender it should face the use of "force" against its outpost in the  Middle East — Israel — and London itself should receive the "treatment" meted out  to Japan in 1945.
While crushing Britain, LaRouche would carry out the unification of other Western  nations by installing "humanist" regimes in each.
Nuclear blackmail would be a  helpful means to this end: "The might of the United States . . . will moderate the  heteronomic impulses of the erring."
Once the smaller nations recognized that     American policy "lias a fist witliin it," clianges of government would  "spontaneously erupt around the globe" (presumably like the fascist putsches  that erupted in Eastern Europe in the 1930s).
LaRouche provided a rationale in  terms of international law.
One must distinguish, he said, between the  sovereignty of nations in the abstract and the sovereignty of particular incumbent  governments.
To extend the principle of sovereignty from the former to the latter  is "specious," he said.
With the entire West unified, purged, and totally mobilized, America would be  ready to go after the "last bastion" of the enemy — the Soviet Union.
This would  not be a matter of a few bombs or a putsch.
LaRouche believed that war  between the two superpowers "cannot be less than total war," and that to win  such a war one would have to hit the enemy with an atomic, bacteriological, and  chemical triple punch.
LaRouche called this "ABC paving" because it supposedly  " 'paves' the entire front of assault to the purpose of exterminating every possible  means of opposition."
The attack would occur in waves: maximum-strength ABC  bombardment of "all adversary logistical and political [i.e., civilian] targets out of  short-term reach" would be followed by ABC tactical bombardment of front-line  targets and then by rapid advance of ground forces through the ruins with  continuing ABC support.
The war would become a "meatgrinder," with the West  hopefully emerging from each phase with a marginal gain in relative strength.
Whichever side possessed greater surviving "in-depth logistical and deployable  reserve capabilities" (i.e., whichever side was better at total mobilization) would  win.
LaRouche conceded that the initial nuclear exchange would "eliminate between  120 and 180 million lives in the United States," and that the Soviet Union would  lose "up to 30 percent of its population."
He even admitted as "credible" the claim  by scientists that the radioactive cesium-137 levels would "eliminate all higher  animal life on earth."
Although he said that such considerations do not apply  when great powers "threaten the total conquest of one another," he apparently  later decided that so final a solution for himself as well as the enemy was not  really desirable.
Shortly after writing the above, he began his intensive  propaganda push for Star Wars, which some on the right see as a miracle shield  that might make a first strike marginally possible.
Assuming a victory short of mutual annihilation, what should happen next?
LaRouche says that the "pacification process of military occupation" must begin  with wiping out the "oligarchist component" in the Soviet Union.
It also must  include the "creation and defense" of new cities on the occupied territory as the  "chief mediators of scientific and technological progress into urban and rural life."
This "citybuilding" policy should be the chief objective of the occupying force,  LaRouche says.
This is nothing new.
SS chief Heinrich Himmler also had a citybuilding plan for a  string of Aryan cities to be built under SS sponsorship from the Ukraine to the     Caucasus as strategic foci for tine rutliless pacification of tliat vast region.
Himmler glorified tine medieval German king Heinrich I, who earned the title of  "citybuilder" by constructing fortresses on the eastern frontier to hold back the  Magyars.
Himmler even regarded himself as Heinrich I's reincarnation and built a  shrine to him.
A photo accompanying a LaRouche article on pacification  suggests that his dream is similar to Himmler's.
According to the caption, it  shows U.S. Army soldiers working in a vast cavern "underneath the Greenland  polar ice cap."
This supposedly demonstrates that GIs have "the potential to  serve as an army of citybuilders."
Any former SS veteran in West Germany would  get the point, for the main U.S. base in Greenland is at Thule, which happens to  be the name the Nazis gave to the alleged Arctic homeland of the Aryans.
The  name also suggests the Thule Society, the Munich occult lodge believed by  many neo-Nazis to have recruited Hitler for his historic mission.
And in the  popular mythology that has grown up around Nazism, a team of Nazi scientists is  supposed to have escaped in submarines at the end of the war to a secret UFO  base under the polar ice to prepare for the eventual rise of a Fourth Reich.
In imposing the "benefits of a Republican order" on occupied countries,  LaRouche sometimes cites Alexander the Great as a model conqueror.
Most  historians would agree that Alexander's policies were relatively benign.
But the  LaRouchians also have another model: Timur the Great, also known as the  "Prince of Destruction," a Mongol who conquered most of Central Asia in the  fourteenth century.
They depict him as a "humanist," although he was a  genocidal monster who probably killed more civilians than any conqueror prior to  Hitler.
His soldiers decapitated the entire population of Baghdad, piling up the  victims' heads in a pyramid to rot in the sun.
In 1983 an NCLC drama troupe staged for the faithful a version of Tamburlaine,  Christopher Marlowe's lurid Elizabethan tragedy about Timur.
New Solidarity  explained that the play was selected because it provided a sympathetic portrait of  a hero who, like LaRouche, "makes his own rules."
Marlowe's Tamburlaine, the  reviewer said, is a "city-builder" who demonstrates his humanism by using  conquered emperors as a footstool.
As to his stern measures, the reviewer  chided NCLC members for their lack of understanding: "Some get queasy when  Tamburlaine skewers the Virgins of Damascus, and [some] pout heads-in-hands  during speeches about piling millions of carcasses at the gates of hell.
But, as  long as their [sic] is a place in hell for the present-day [oligarchical] emperors; so,  there must be a place in the minds of men for Marlowe's Tamburlaine."
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
PART THREE: LaRouche and Star  Wars   " We are shaping increasingly the course of important events. . .  .
We play the enemy forces as a hundred-pound fisherman  successfully plays a powerful sailfish or oversized tarpon"   —LYNDON H. LAROUCHE, JR., "Resisting the  Pressures of 'Littleness,' " 1981   Chapter Eight   The Greatest Invention Since Fire   In a historic speech delivered on March 23, 1983, President Reagan announced  the Strategic Defense Initiative, a plan for a space-based missile defense  system.
To most of the Washington press corps, the so-called Star Wars speech  came as a bolt out of the blue.
But the LaRouchians were not at all surprised.
For  years they had advocated their own version of SDI and were in close contact with  officials who helped develop Reagan's proposal.
LaRouche began speculating about a space-based particle- or laser-beam  weapons system as early as 1975.
His organization included scientists who  grasped the basic principles and were able to explain them in layman's terms for  him.
During the late 1970s he became more and more intrigued.
Beam weapons  seemed to fit well with his dreams of world conquest.
A miracle shield against  ballistic missiles would make large-scale offensive wars thinkable for the first  time since the beginning of the nuclear age.
The Fusion Energy Foundation, established in 1 974 as a cover for the NCLC  intelligence staff's science and technology division, became the chief LaRouchian  propaganda vehicle for beam weapons.
In the late 1970s it gained a measure of  credibility in the scientific community and the aerospace and nuclear power  industries by publishing the monthly Fusion, which championed high technology.
It also sponsored seminars and conferences on scientific and political topics.
Its  officers included Dr. Morris Levitt and Dr. Steven Bardwell, both physicists, and  John Gilbertson, a nuclear engineer.
The FEF tried to cultivate Major General George Keegan, Jr. (ret.)
, a former Air  Force intelligence chief who believed the Soviets were gaining a dangerous edge  in beam technologies.
When Keegan called for stepped-up research in this field.
FEF members offered their support.
They published a pamphlet, Sputnik of the  Seventies (1977), praising Keegan and calling particle-beam weapons "crucial to  this nation's survival."
But Keegan was suspicious of their intentions and soon cut  them off.
The FEF continued to publicize the issue on their own, with frequent articles  about the latest American and Soviet advances in relevant fields of theoretical  and applied physics.
They recognized that fusion energy research had potential  applications in the beam weapons field, and that many of the scientists for any  large-scale Pentagon effort would have to come from civilian fusion research.
By  discussing the two technologies together, Sputnil< of thie Seventies was right on  target: Many fusion scientists whom the FEF cultivated in the late 1970s ended  up in SDI research in the 1980s.
There is no mystery about how the FEF won the respect of fusion scientists.
It  launched a campaign to get them more government funding.
FEF staff members  testified before Congress, lobbied, held press conferences, and crisscrossed the  nation on speaking tours.
Meanwhile, LaRouche followers at airports displayed  pro-fusion posters and literature.
Hundreds of thousands of Americans first  learned about fusion from their encounters with these seven-days-a-week  salesmen.
The FEF undeniably met a real need, and not just for a handful of scientists.
OPEC oil price hikes had made cheaper energy sources a national priority, and  fusion energy was the most promising long-range solution.
But fusion  researchers had been inept at presenting their case to the public.
Thus the  Carter administration poured billions of dollars into synfuel, only a few million into  fusion.
To frustrated scientists the FEF was a heaven-sent ally.
Support for the FEF's work was especially strong among government fusion  scientists.
According to Department of Energy documents obtained under the  Freedom of Information Act, the contacts began during the Ford administration.
At first the FEF spokesmen made a comical impression.
One DOE scientist  circulated a memo describing how they had tried to convince him of the need for  a new world monetary system based on the Soviet ruble.
But during the Carter  years the FEF proved its effectiveness in building a fusion constituency.
Researchers and administrators in the DOE's Office of Fusion Energy (OFE)  began to take the LaRouche foundation seriously, speaking at its conferences  and praising its work.
They were willing to overlook its sinister politics, including  its scurrilous attacks on Energy Secretary James Schlesinger.
The FEF might be  nasty, but it was useful.
The relationship between the OFE and the LaRouchians had a peek-a-boo  quality.
This was reflected in a September 1978 letter from OFE director Edward  Kintner to Stephen Dean, head of the Magnetic Confinement Systems Division,  who had previously spoken at FEF events.
Kintner, apparently under pressure     from superiors, ordered Dean "not to appear" at an FEF meeting later tliat montli  because it was a fund-raising event and because tine FEF liad expressed "policy  disagreement" with top DOE officials.
(The FEF had accused these officials of  being part of a treasonous plot.)
Yet Dr. Kintner's memo also displayed a  remarkable solicitude for the LaRouchians: "This [directive] by no means  precludes . . . staff participation in FEF events in general. . . . Please assist FEF  in arranging for a substitute speaker if possible so as to minimize problems for  the FEF."
The substitute who showed up was Kintner's deputy.
Dr. John Clarke.
He didn't  just talk on fusion technology — he gave a strong endorsement of the FEF.
"You  are one of the few organized groups I know of," he said, "that has the courage to  stand up and advocate high technology as a solution to some of the problems of  the world, and for that I think that we owe you a debt of gratitude."
This statement  was used in Fusion advertisements to solicit subscribers and new FEF members.
When Clarke received inquiries about it, he acknowledged on DOE stationery  that the quote was accurate.
In a letter to a Georgia Tech professor he said that  although he didn't agree with the FEF's politics, he thought they performed a  "valuable function in our society."
Shortly after Clarke's speech, a senior scientist from the DOE's Office of Energy  Research addressed an FEF conference in Pittsburgh.
Scientists from Lawrence  Livermore National Laboratory and Princeton University's Tokamak fusion reactor  project also participated.
Fusion crowed that the event was attended by  representatives of major corporations and that it "marked a quantum jump in  FEF's stature as the political leadership of the scientific and engineering  communities."
While this was an exaggeration, it suggested the hidden agenda  behind the FEF's touting of high technology.
In 1979 Stephen Dean left the government to set up Fusion Power Associates, a  nonprofit firm backed by energy and defense corporations.
This was a setback  for the LaRouchians inasmuch as it co-opted their "leadership" role on fusion.
But  Dean and the LaRouchians continued to have a warm relationship.
In August  1979 he appeared on the podium with LaRouche at a U.S. Labor Party rally in  Lansing, Michigan.
He also accompanied the FEF's Uwe Henke von Parpart on a  FEF-arranged trip to India, where they met with fusion energy buff Indira Gandhi  and other notables.
When Dean was questioned about the FEF at a 1980 U.S. Senate energy  hearing, he testified that "fusion community people attempt to treat the variety of  different people that come to us equally and respectfully, independently of  whether we agree with their political views. . . . Some of the comments and  positions taken by the FEF are in fact positions we support on the merits."
He  added in a 1 984 phone interview; "I don't think they've done the country any  harm.
It makes life exciting to have them around."
OFE scientists were not tine only ones impressed by tine FEF.
By 1980 it claimed  thousands of dues-paying members and over 80,000 Fusion subscribers.
FEF  director Levitt spoke at West Point on the military applications of fusion power,  and Uwe Parpart gave a presentation at Lawrence Livermore.
Almost $2 million  in donations poured in during fiscal 1980-81.
John Bosma, editor of Military Space magazine, explained the enthusiasm for the  FEF as being partly due to the "top drawer" technical expertise of Fusion  magazine.
He had worked for Boeing Aerospace in Seattle in the late 1970s, and  recalled senior managers and engineers "waving [Fusion] around and saying.
This is great stuff.' "
Another key to the FEF's success was its championing of nuclear power at a time  when antinuclear sentiment was sweeping the nation.
The 1979 Three Mile  Island near-disaster alarmed millions of Americans.
Environmentalists staged  large demonstrations at nuclear power construction sites such as Seabrook in  New Hampshire.
Hollywood's The China Syndrome, starring LaRouche hate  figure Jane Fonda, portrayed nuclear engineers as liars and murderers.
The nuclear power industry was dismayed and angered.
The FEF played on this  by charging a giant plot to undermine American world leadership in science and  technology.
Fusion blamed the Three Mile Island incident on saboteurs.
It offered  slogans and bumper stickers for an industry counterattack: "More Nukes, Less  Kooks" and "Feed Jane Fonda to the Whales."
It also suggested that the United  States should emulate the Soviet Union's hard line against "zero-growthniks."
The February 1980 issue hailed a Soviet government scientist, A. P. Aleksandrov,  who had attacked scientists opposed to building nuclear plants near cities.
Said  Aleksandrov, as quoted by Fusion: "Nuclear plants are very safe."
The FEF provided an opening wedge for other activities.
LaRouche's intelligence  staff prepared reports for power companies on antinuclear activists.
His 1980  presidential campaign committee solicited donations from executives of nuclear  power and aerospace corporations.
Dozens of scientists and engineers  (including a top man from Three Mile Island) signed a full-page Fusion  advertisement backing LaRouche for President.
Although some FEF supporters were turned off by its strident attacks on  Darwinism, rock music, and Isaac Newton, it continued to grow.
One reason was  its support for a 1980 congressional bill to establish fusion power as a major  national energy goal.
The bill's sponsor.
Representative Mike McCormack (D.-  Wash.), envisioned a development push modeled on the Apollo Project.
He  estimated it would cost about $20 billion.
In a speech before the House he  predicted that the development of fusion energy would be "the second most  important energy-related event in human history — second only to the controlled  use of fire."
McCormack didn't need the LaRouchians to tell him this.
Many distinguished  scientists had urged increased fusion funding.
Nevertheless, the sweeping nature  of the McCormack bill was not dissimilar to that of a 1976 fusion research and  development draft bill prepared by the FEF.
During the late 1 970s, FEF staffers  sent a steady stream of proposals to McCormack's office.
They attempted to  mobilize support for his 1980 bill through speaking tours and press interviews,  encouraging a barrage of postcards and telegrams to Congress.
Simultaneously  they attacked the Senate version, accusing its sponsor.
Senator Paul Tsongas  (D.-Mass.)
, of attempting to sabotage fusion development.
The campaign for the McCormack bill proved to be a dry run for the  LaRouchians' beam weapons campaign.
FEF director Levitt warned that the  United States was falling dangerously behind the Soviet Union in industry,  education, and defense.
The McCormack bill could create a "strategic focal point"  to mobilize the nation for a historic comeback.
"Fusion is strategic militarily,"  Levitt said.
In November 1980, President Carter signed the Magnetic Fusion Engineering  Act, which set the goal of a successful magnetic fusion demonstration plant by  the year 2000.
Although the bill provided only token funding, the FEF hailed it as  a historic step.
After Ronald Reagan assumed office, the massive fusion funding  McCormack had envisioned went into SDI instead, and many fusion scientists  shifted into SDI research.
The FEF and LaRouche uttered nary a word of protest.
They recognized that SDI offered a far better opportunity to push their ideological  agenda.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Nine   The "Higher" Peace Movement   In the spring of 1 981 , two years before President Reagan's Star Wars speecli,  New Solidarity reported that the President was "known to favor a space-based  ABM system."
The FEF promptly held a seminar in Washington on "anti-missile  beam potentials" and other national-security implications of fusion energy.
But  the LaRouche campaign for beam weapons did not get into full swing until the  following winter, when LaRouche supposedly received a message from a  mysterious personage known only as "Mister Ed."
LaRouche had received dozens of messages of advice from Mister Ed since the  mid-1970s, often in the form of "E to L" (Ed to LaRouche) memoranda.
This time  the message suggested that he launch a major push for beam weapons.
LaRouche, believing that Mister Ed spoke for a faction of the Central Intelligence  Agency, "accepted the assignment," according to a report LaRouche's attorneys  filed in Boston federal court five years later.
In February 1982, LaRouche held a forum in Washington to propose a campaign  for beam weapons.
It would be a good counter to the nuclear freeze movement,  he said.
The next month he issued a research and development proposal  followed in May by an FEF "white paper."
In August the FEF circulated a report  on Capitol Hill regarding a scheme for X-ray laser weapons favored by Dr.  Edward Teller, the father of the H-bomb.
The FEF held briefings for  congressional aides to promote Teller's idea.
LaRouche's publications reported on the various high-level lobbying efforts for  space weaponry — including the September 1982 White House meeting between  Teller and President Reagan.
New Solidarity printed the text of Teller's speech  the following month at the National Press Club, and dubbed his proposal the  "LaRouche-Teller initiative."
The FEF's Dr. Bardwell embarked on a tour of  college campuses to convince audiences to join "the higher peace movement."
LaRouche apparently was forewarned about Reagan's March 1983 speech.
The  previous month he had instructed his followers to intensify their campaign of  petitions and lobbying and to make beam weapons "a household word in  America . . . during the month of March."
The day after Reagan's speech,  LaRouche hailed it as probably the most important action "by any President in  twenty years," adding that "true greatness . . . touched President Ronald Reagan  last night ... a moment of greatness never to be forgotten."
The media turned to the FEF to explain Reagan's proposal.
The wire services,  syndicated columnists, and The Washington Post all quoted FEF spokesmen.
Meanwhile LaRouche began to assert that he was really SDI's "intellectual  author."
According to Dr. Ray Pollock, the National Security Council's director of  defense programs at that time, LaRouche's followers "flooded Capitol Hill" with  literature claiming this.
Pollock said that although some White House officials  were annoyed, no steps were taken to set the record straight.
The FEF was undeniably one of the best sources for up-to-date information on  SDI in its early stages.
An October 1983 FEF seminar in the U.S. Senate's  Dirksen Office Building was packed with government officials and foreign  diplomats to hear FEF scientists explain the latest developments.
John Pike,  associate director for space policy at the Federation of American Scientists,  recalled that he first learned about Teller's Excalibur project from the  LaRouchians.
Pike said it was apparent that they had talked to "people with  access to classified information."
Beam Defense, a 1983 book by the FEF's staff,  contained.
Pike said, "one of the most comprehensive and detailed studies"  publicly available on particle beams and X-ray lasers.
It won a 1984 award from  the Aviation/Space Writers Association.
The LaRouchians were reaping the rewards of their foresight and hard work.
When they published their first article on beam weapons in 1975, warning about  alleged Soviet breakthroughs, they attracted little notice.
But they persisted,  building their network of contacts among scientists.
One of their first targets was Teller.
As late as 1976 they had described him as a  Rockefeller agent and a plotter of genocide.
But when Teller delivered a speech  attacking the ecology movement and its zero-growth theories, the LaRouchians  began praising him.
LaRouche set his sights on a private meeting with Teller to  explore the possibilities of an alliance.
FEF staffers hoped that Dr. Stefan  Possony, a Teller colleague at Stanford University's Hoover Institution, would  arrange it.
LaRouche dedicated his magnum opus.
The Case of Walter  Lippmann, to Possony and Teller as "the writer's former opponents who exhibited  the integrity to modify their views on important questions."
(They were not his  only dedicatees; the list also included Fidel Castro, Helmut Schmidt, and the  ghost of Benjamin Franklin.)
But Possony, whose taste in rightist politics ran  more along World Anti-Communist League lines, never delivered the goods,  although he did address two FEF conferences before dropping away.
In a 1984 phone interview Teller called LaRouche "a poorly informed man with  fantastic conceptions."
Teller said he had chatted with FEF members on the  phone from time to time, but had rejected all invitations to meet with LaRouche.
He acknowledged he had made a mistake in not objecting when they began  publishing articles suggesting he was working with them.
"I was reluctant to  criticize someone for agreeing with my ideas," he explained.
In 1983 the LaRouchians strongly urged Teller to reciprocate their support.
He  asked a close personal friend, Dr, Robert Budwine of Lawrence Livermore, to  take the matter in hand.
Budwine knew very little about the LaRouchians, but  agreed to meet with them to take the pressure off Teller.
He ended up traveling  to Paris and Bangkok, at LaRouchian expense, to speak at beam weapons  conferences sponsored by the LaRouche publication Executive Intelligence  Review.
Budwine became deeply intrigued by the LaRouchians and was drawn for  several months into the periphery of their cult life.
Among other things, he  attended the NCLC annual conference in January 1984 at LaRouche's Virginia  mansion, where the baroque harpsichord background music struck him as "an  attempt to re-create an eighteenth-century salon."
He formed friendships with  Uwe Parpart and other NCLC members, and spent several hours in private  discussions with LaRouche on Indo-European root languages, Riemannian  geometry, and other LaRouche hobbies.
Budwine's scientific training ultimately made him a poor target for recruitment.
"They kept talking about this great method they have, but I kept asking: 'What  kind of method is it that consistently gives you the wrong answers?' "
He began  to read up on cults and brainwashing, and came to the conclusion that  "LaRouche is not a serious man, he's even less than that . . . LaRouche is crazy."
The LaRouchians continued to go to great lengths to entice Star Wars scientists.
Roy Woodruff, former head of arms development at Livermore, recalls at least  twenty phone calls from Chuck Stevens, a Fusion reporter and former nuclear  engineering student.
Again and again.
Woodruff refused to speak with him, but  Stevens persisted.
"He sat at the West Gate and waited for me," Woodruff said.
"I went out another gate to avoid him."
New Solidarity articles often praised Dr. Lowell Wood, chief of Livermore's "O  Group," a top SDI research team.
Wood said in 1 984 that FEF representatives  called him from time to time and that he also ran into them at scientific  conferences.
Asked if they had influenced the development of SDI, he was  hesitant to deny it.
He said they had boasted to him about meetings with top  presidential aides and Pentagon officials.
Although he never attempted to confirm  these claims, he said that many administration officials had mentioned to him the  "quality, speed, and accuracy" of LaRouche's intelligence operation.
Dr. John Nuckolls, Livermore's associate director for physics and the man to  whom the O Group reported, received calls from the LaRouchians throughout the  late 1970s and early 1980s.
Their attempts to "break the classification barrier,"  he said, made "interaction difficult."
He couldn't decide if their promotional  activities on behalf of fusion energy and SDI were "positive or negative."
However, he thought it might "be useful to have someone at the grass roots —     assuming they are at the grass roots."
He said he didn't want to either attacl< or  defend them.
"We have a common interest," he said.
For Dr. Winston Bostick and Dr. Friedwardt Winterberg, physicists on the outer  fringes of Star Wars, this common interest involved more tlian SDI.
Bostick,  former chairman of the Stevens Institute of Technology physics department,  participated in beam weapons-related research at the Kirtland Air Force Base  weapons laboratory from 1979 to 1983.
He was also a leading figure in the FEF,  speaking at its conferences, writing for Fusion, and serving on the editorial board  of another FEF publication, the International Journal of Fusion Energy.
In a 1984  telephone interview he said he supported LaRouche's attempts to promote  "German military, scientific, cultural, and economic traditions."
Winterberg was a fusion specialist with the University of Nevada's Desert  Research Institute.
He volunteered ideas on beam weapons to the Air Force in  the late 1970s, and later speculated on the subject for LaRouchian publications.
In 1980 he described LaRouche as having the "most scientifically founded"  program of any candidate for the U.S. presidency.
The FEF published his  Physical Principles of Thermonuclear Explosive Devices (1 981 ) and also sent  him on overseas speaking tours.
One of the most important government scientists contacted by the LaRouchians  was Dr. Richard DeLauer, Under Secretary of Defense for Research and  Engineering from 1981 to 1984.
DeLauer, who first became aware of their  activities in the late 1970s when he was executive vice president of TRW Inc.,  granted an interview to an Executive Intelligence Review (EIR) reporter in his  Pentagon office in 1981.
He fulminated on the weaknesses of American science,  which he blamed on the "greening of America" and "gurus" who "took advantage  of food stamps."
Asked about his assessment of Soviet progress on space-based  ABM systems, he said his views came in large part from reading EIR — "you guys  are supposed to know more about it than anybody else."
In mid-1984, after being attacked by the LaRouchians for alleged foot dragging  on SDI, DeLauer claimed that his statement about EIR's expertise had been  mere sarcasm, an expression of his "exasperation" with the interviewer.
"I have  no use for that guy [LaRouche] and his opinions."
he said.
But he praised the  FEF for its pronuclear stance: "In their support of nuclear power — in that sense —  I support them."
He had even donated money to the FEF as "the only active  group that opposes Jane Fonda."
Asked about a sexually demeaning anti-Fonda  bumper sticker sold by the FEF, he chuckled and said: "I got another one [FEF  slogan] for you: 'More people have been killed in the back seat of Ted Kennedy's  car than in a nuclear accident.' "
A far more useful contact was the NSC's Dr. Pollock, one of the key policymakers  behind Reagan's Star Wars speech.
Pollock said the LaRouchians first contacted  him while he was working at Los Alamos National Laboratory in the late 1970s.
He began to chat on the phone with Fusion reporter Stevens to find out the latest  gossip about the fusion research community.
When Pollock moved to Washington to work at the Department of Energy, he  sometimes lunched with Stevens.
After his appointment to the National Security  Council he continued the relationship, and during the months prior to the  announcing of SDI he met on several occasions with high-level LaRouche aides  such as Uwe Parpart.
They urged on him a plan for a beam weapons "Manhattan  Project."
He found merit in their ideas on the potential economic spin-offs.
They  offered to pay his way to conferences overseas, but he declined.
Pollock met twice with LaRouche at the prodding of National Security Adviser  William Clark's right-hand man, Richard Morris.
Morris was present at the first  meeting, as was Helga LaRouche.
They discussed German politics, and Pollock  found LaRouche to be a "frightening kind of fellow."
Pollock's recollection of the  second meeting is that LaRouche explained his conspiracy theory of history.
LaRouche in a 1984 deposition said they also discussed the "economic  implications" of SDI.
Pollock says he put LaRouche's views into a one-page  memo and sent it across the street to the White House.
In 1986, LaRouche wrote that his personal contribution to SDI had been to  demonstrate that it was affordable.
Obviously the United States could pay for a  "first-generation" system.
The problem lay in the costs of deploying second-,  third-, and fourth-generation systems if the Soviets developed countermeasures.
LaRouche claimed that he had proven, via his LaRouche-Riemann economic  model, that the "spillover" of SDI technologies into the civilian economy would  produce profits fully offsetting SDI's cost.
He had thus proposed "a 'crash  program' ... as the best way to cause this 'spillover' to occur."
In other words,  LaRouche had proposed that the Reagan administration adopt one of the key  points of his own Grand Design: pay-as-you-go total mobilization.
The LaRouche organization chiefly contributed to SDI by publicizing and  organizing support for it in Western Europe.
They held numerous conferences  and seminars in Paris, Bonn, and Rome, attracting many high-level military  officers.
The first such events occurred months before Reagan's Star Wars  speech, with audiences being told something big was in the works.
(This led  many Europeans to subsequently regard LaRouche as a major player in SDI  policy.)
The LaRouchian effort was strongly supported by Colonel Marc Geneste,  a French neutron bomb expert, and General Giulio Maori, a former NATO expert  on high technology weapons who ran for the Italian Parliament as a LaRouchian  beam-weapons candidate.
Several retired German officers joined with the  LaRouchians to launch Patriots for Germany, a pro-Star Wars political party.
A  similar group was launched in Paris under the suggestive name France et Son  Armee.
In much of their propaganda, the LaRouchians presented themselves as  allies of Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and Lieutenant-General James  Abrahamson (USAF), the director of SDI.
When Abrahamson went to Europe in     July 1984 to build NATO support for his program, the LaRouchians boasted that  their organizing efforts over the previous two years had prepared the ground for  his favorable reception.
The success of LaRouche's European campaign hinged on maintaining an image  of legitimacy.
In this he received help from the highest levels in Washington.
The  State Department sent a priority cable bearing George Shultz's name to the Bonn  embassy.
Entitled "Anti-LaRouche Disorganizing Activity," the January 1983  cable quoted a complaint from a LaRouche aide that "certain U.S. embassy  officials abroad" were trying to dissuade individuals in foreign countries from  associating with LaRouche.
The cable then reminded the embassy that negative  characterizations of U.S. political figures "are not authorized" and directed staff  members to "refrain from offering personal opinions while acting in their official  capacities."
(The cable was based on a DOS press guidance statement that EIR  had quoted from the previous month.)
LaRouche's followers also promoted SDI in Japan, which they said could thereby  be transformed into an "unsinkable aircraft carrier."
Uwe Parpart and other FEF  officials made several trips to Tokyo.
According to General Yoshio Ishikawa, the  Japanese defense attache in Washington, these trips were sponsored by  "several private associations concerned with defense."
When a Japanese  translation of Beam Defense was published in 1984, Parpart met with Liberal  Democratic Party legislators in Tokyo, then addressed a defense industry  seminar.
When Japan's Cabinet began formal consideration in 1986 of whether or not to  participate in SDI, the LaRouchians staged a Tokyo conference to urge "full  strategic commitment."
In addition to LaRouche's usual gaggle of scientific  experts, the speakers included a retired French general, a retired American  colonel (who was receiving $2,000 a week from LaRouche as a consultant), an  engineer from a California firm involved in SDI, and spokesmen for two Japanese  research institutes.
According to EIR, the conference was intended as an  antidote to the "treasonous" influence of Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard  Perle, who had visited Tokyo several weeks previously.
EIR called him an agent  of the "Mossad-linked Jewish Institute of National Security Affairs" and accused  him of trying to undercut Japanese participation in SDI.
The LaRouchians also kept up a vigorous propaganda effort throughout the  United States: signs at airports, FEF speaking tours, lobbying for pro-SDI  resolutions in state legislatures, beam-weapons election campaign slates.
They  brought over General Maori and Colonel Geneste for speaking tours in 1984.
Maori, who had previously urged American military officers to "begin to concern  themselves with politics," was given an official Pentagon briefing on SDI.
Geneste spoke at the U.S. Air Force Academy and met with Edward Teller.
The  Pentagon also furnished its own speakers for LaRouchian events.
In May 1984  two top officials of the DOD's International Security Policy Division accepted an     invitation to address a LaRoucliian rally in Crystal City, Virginia.
DOD spokesman  John d'Amecourt said in September 1984 that the department regarded the  LaRouchians as a "conservative group . . . very supportive of the administration  in general."
As LaRouche's notoriety grew, Pentagon officials became reluctant  to speak at such events, but EIR continued to gain interviews with top brass (for  instance, a 1985 interview with Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic, Admiral  Wesley McDonald).
In 1986 the Fusion Energy Foundation became the target of multiple criminal  investigations.
According to prosecutors, evidence showed that FEF fundraisers,  along with those of other LaRouche front groups, were defrauding elderly  persons in every region of the country by soliciting unsecured loans with no  intention of repaying them.
FEF officials were indicted for loan fraud in New York  and Virginia, and for credit-card fraud in Massachusetts.
(The LaRouchians  denied the charges.)
Federal authorities raided the offices and seized the assets  of the FEF and other LaRouche front groups to collect fines levied by a federal  judge after they failed to cooperate with grand jury subpoenas.
Despite these troubles, the FEF was not abandoned by its friends in the fusion  and SDI communities.
The July 1987 issue of Spectrum, published by the  Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, carried a full-page ad signed by  many scientists and engineers from Star Wars-linked corporations and  laboratories protesting the government's shutdown of the FEF.
The ad's  signatories included twenty-two employees of Lawrence Livermore.
Dr. Stephen  Dean of Fusion Power Associates, which is supported by major Star Wars  contractors, sent out a letter defending the FEF and calling the government's  charges "quite far-fetched."
Urging FPA members to take action, he suggested  they contact LaRouche aide Carol White.
On balance, LaRouche's twelve-year campaign for fusion power, beam weapons,  and SDI brought him more benefits than problems.
His followers learned to  operate in influential mainstream circles, not just among right-wing eccentrics.
Many scientists and government officials found the LaRouchians useful and thus  were willing to overlook their anti-Semitism and other unpleasant qualities.
Some  of these alliances of convenience lasted for years, involving frequent low-profile  exchange of favors.
LaRouche built up a pool of influential people whom he had  compromised, and who thus had a vested interest in downplaying his extremism  to avoid embarrassment to themselves.
Many SDI figures refused to have anything to do with LaRouche, others  distanced themselves from him when informed of his background, and some, like  General Daniel Graham of High Frontiers, publicly denounced him.
Yet far too  many SDI proponents quietly winked at his involvement in the politics of SDI.
Such people wanted the American taxpayer to pour vast sums into building a  supposedly invulnerable military shield against the Soviet Union, yet were     themselves far from invulnerable politically and morally when a totalitarian  movement appeared under their noses.
Many of the early claims for Star Wars were prompted by political enthusiasm  and unsupported by scientific data.
As in many historic cases of pseudo-science,  the motives of critics were impugned to divert attention from theoretical and  research flaws.
This is where the LaRouchians played their most insidious role.
In an atmosphere in which a scientist as important as Roy Woodruff could be  demoted at Lawrence Livermore for questioning dubious data, hundreds of  Fusion and EIR articles accused SDI critics — or persons such as General  Graham, who advocated technological approaches different from Teller's — of  being unpatriotic or worse.
Although Teller himself denounced an especially  nasty EIR attack on Graham, many SDI supporters continued to chat with the  LaRouchians (for instance.
Dr. Robert Jastrow, who told a Fusion reporter in  1984 that it would take a psychologist to explain the attitudes of anti-SDI  scientists).
The use of the LaRouchians as SDI's cat's paw was a reflection both of the  program's ideologically driven nature and of the cynicism underlying the ideology.
But the LaRouchians were not merely pawns in all this.
They had their own  unique agenda.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Ten   Old Nazis and New Dreams   While speculating on total war in the late 1970s, LaRouche had to concede that  an American-Soviet nuclear showdown was too dangerous.
Between 120 and  180 million Americans would die in the initial exchange alone.
This threatened his  entire dream of world conquest.
His solution was a multitrillion-dollar crash  mobilization to build a space-based particle-beam missile shield.
Naturally he  said it would be a defensive system.
The FEF's airport literature tables displayed  "Beam the Bomb" posters.
Dr. Steven Bardwell urged audiences to join the "  'higher' peace movement."
But Bardwell quit the LaRouche organization in early  1984 and stated bluntly, in a letter to his former comrades, what many of them  had known but ignored: LaRouche's goal was not a defensive system such as  President Reagan's SDI, but a "first strike" system predicated on a denial of "the  right of the Soviet Union to exist" in its present form.
Indeed, Bardwell claimed,  the LaRouchians had privately discussed "Doomsday weapons," such as "cobalt  bombs with fans."
In the early and middle 1980s LaRouche utilized SDI and beam weapons to draw  together the scattered forces of European and American neo-fascism to defend  Nazi war criminals and promote revanchism.
This effort was symbolized by a  photograph of a four-pronged object, glowing with light, that appeared from time  to time in Fusion and New Solidarity.
Its shape was reminiscent of the swastika.
A caption in a 1978 issue of Fusion said it was a plasmoid created at Lawrence  Livermore National Laboratory in the 1950s, when a scientist supposedly collided  four plasma beams to "form a rotating plasma structure whose dynamics are  governed by a 'balancing' of forces."
In a 1985 Fusion article by LaRouche urging  total mobilization for SDI, the ghostly object was described as a laboratory  "'galaxy'.
.
.
created by colliding electron beams," and it was paired with a  telescope photo of a barred spiral galaxy in the constellation Eridanus.
According  to the photo caption, the two objects represent "harmonic patterns," while  LaRouche described SDI itself as the precursor of a "hyperbolic flaring" based on  "triply self-reflexive" spirals.
Readers were also informed that the "spiral  geometry of many galaxies coheres with the spiral shape found in living  biological processes."
The reference to cosmic spirals in an article on advanced weapons systems was  something that SS veterans in Germany could understand.
During World War II  the theory of spiraling expansion/conquest had been a staple of Nazi  propaganda.
As a 1942 tract put it, "The living space of the Third Reich can be  enlarged only by moving out from a powerful territorial hub and by accomplishing     this conquest progressively, step by step, following the accelerating movement of  a spiraling dextrogyre."
In the postwar period, neo-Nazis developed various forms of swastika mysticism;  for instance, the late James Madole of the New York-based National  Renaissance Party taught during the 1970s that the swastika represented  "undefiled cosmic energy and hydrogen . . . flowing into the spiral arms of our  mighty galaxy from the hidden galactic heart."
But LaRouche developed a more  sophisticated spiral mysticism embracing biology as well as cosmology, in which  "manifold leaps" produce higher and higher stages of consciousness, racial  types, superhuman species, and weapons systems.
The LaRouchians reached out to former Nazi scientists who had worked on V-2  rockets, jet aircraft, and the Nazi version of the atom bomb at research centers  like Peenemunde.
They also approached West German military officers, using a  sales pitch that glorified "classical German culture" as the high point of world  civilization while vilifying Russian culture.
LaRouche developed a new version of  the Grand Design featuring forced-draft development of SDI, underground  factories on the moon, Lebensraum on Mars, and electromagnetic weapons  capable of turning the Soviet Union into a vast microwave oven.
LaRouche and his wife, Helga, quickly developed a following among retired West  German military men.
Admiral Karl-Adolf Zenker, former head of the West  German Navy and a World War II veteran, joined Patriots for Germany and met  with LaRouche on many occasions.
As a Navy captain in 1956 Zenker had  created a furor by telling cadets they should respect Admirals Erich Raeder and  Karl Doenitz, Nazi war criminals convicted at Nuremberg.
Zenker said the two  were blameless men who had merely done their "duty to their people."
When  LaRouche was indicted for obstruction of justice in a credit-card fraud case in  1987, Zenker called him an "honest defender of a strong Western alliance."
Brigadier General Paul-Albert Scherer, former chief of West German military  counterintelligence, also joined the bandwagon.
After LaRouche's indictment, he  testified before a Schiller Institute-sponsored commission set up to prove that the  U.S. government was violating LaRouche's civil rights.
He praised LaRouche's  warm heart, "gentle humor," and devotion to the Western alliance.
LaRouche's New Benjamin Franklin Publishing House issued a translation of  Modern Irregular Warfare by Brigadier General (Reserves) Freiherr von der  Heydt, a Bavarian law professor and longtime ultranationalist who had been a  Nazi war hero.
New Solidarity said the book presented a model of "total violent  confrontation, involving the totality of the state and people."
Suggesting this  model might be useful in handling left-wing opponents of SDI, the NCLC  newspaper urged the public to make bulk purchases "so that we can provide  military, educational, and government institutions with the copies they need."
The list of those who endorsed LaRouche's various public appeals included a  former Frankfurt police chief, a vice president of the Bavarian Soldiers  Association, a Kiel University professor who had worked on Hitler's uranium  bomb, and various ultra-rightist generals in France, Italy, and Spain.
The  LaRouchians also cultivated former Nazi scientists brought to the United States  after the war as part of the Army's Operation Paperclip to work on defense  projects.
They included the survivors of Wernher von Braun's team who designed  missiles at the Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Alabama.
For decades the wartime deeds of these "old-timers" (as they call themselves)  appeared to be a closed book.
Former SS general von Braun became an  American hero for his work on the space program.
But in the late 1970s, after  von Braun's death, the Justice Department's Office of Special Investigations  (OSI) began to examine the records of alleged Nazi war criminals in this country,  with the aim of deporting the guilty ones.
When the investigators nibbled at the  edges of the Paperclip crowd, the latter felt angry and betrayed.
Had they not  wiped the slate clean by their contributions to America's fight against  communism?
LaRouche told them the slate never needed any wiping in the first place.
In a  1981 EIR article praising Nazi Germany's work on jet aircraft, he distinguished  between bad Nazi politicians and good Nazi scientists.
"Although the Nazis  commanded the German state," he said, "it was the German nation which  deployed its non-Nazi resources to fight the war," The Peenemunde scientists  were part of this healthy German nationalism.
The crimes of the Nazi regime thus  were "irrelevant" to any judgment of their wartime role.
Fusion and New Solidarity  published adulatory articles about how Peenemunde had paved the way for  fusion energy and SDI.
It was said to represent the "classical German tradition,"  the path to true progress as opposed to the degenerate science of the "British."
In November 1 981 the FEF held a special dinner and awards ceremony for the  University of Colorado's Adolf Busemann, who had worked at Peenemunde.
In  an interview with Fusion he criticized Hitler for not giving Germany's rocket  scientists enough resources to do their job properly.
When he died in 1986, New  Solidarity urged its readers to "reflect on his life with joy" and bemoaned the fact  that so few old-timers were left to "carry on the great traditions of the German  scientific school."
The LaRouchians also developed close ties with Krafft A. Ehricke, a member of  the von Braun team widely known for his visionary ideas on space travel.
He had  served in World War II as a tank platoon leader on the Eastern Front before  being assigned to Peenemunde.
Brought to the United States in 1947, he helped  develop the Atlas rocket, America's first intercontinental ballistic missile.
Retired  and living in La Jolla, California, in the early 1980s, Ehricke dreamed of colonies  on the moon.
He wrote articles for Fusion, served on its editorial advisory board,  and spoke at FEF and Schiller Institute events.
In a 1984 phone interview shortly     before his death, he praised LaRouche's followers as "open, clean-cut, and  positive," in contrast to Jane Fonda and the environmentalists with their "African  grass hut technology."
He said he had spent many an evening with his friends  Lyndon and Helga LaRouche discussing Star Wars and the Soviet Union's plan  to become the neo-Byzantine "Third Rome."
Ehricke said he agreed with  LaRouche's assessment of the Soviet menace because of his own observation of  their murderous qualities during World War II.
Another LaRouchian role model was Arthur Rudolph, the Paperclip engineer who  developed NASA's Saturn V moon rocket.
When he was accused by the Justice  Department of working thousands of slave laborers to death at a V-2 factory in  1943-45, the LaRouchians and the old-timers launched a campaign to depict him  as the innocent victim of a Communist plot.
Yet his Nazi activities were extremely  well documented.
He had joined both the Nazi Party and the SA storm troopers  in 1931, before Hitler came to power.
After serving as an SA Oberscharfuhrer  and then as a Peenemunde engineer, he became production manager of the  underground Mittelwerk factory in the Harz Mountains.
Mittelwerk used slave  labor from the nearby Dora-Nordhausen concentration camp.
A third to a half of  the camp's 60,000 inmates died from disease, starvation, and mistreatment.
Approximately 5,000 died while working for Rudolph, who once stood by while  SS men lynched twelve of his slaves.
In 1945 a U.S. Army report called him a  "100 percent Nazi, dangerous type" and recommended that he be interned.
But after Rudolph joined Operation Paperclip a revised security report said he  was "not an ardent Nazi."
In the early 1980s, having long retired from NASA, he  was investigated by the OSI.
He admitted in a 1983 interview with OSI attorneys  that he had been fully aware of the inhuman working and living conditions of the  Dora-Nordhausen laborers.
The following year he returned to Germany and  agreed to give up his U.S. citizenship rather than face deportation proceedings.
OSI prosecutor Eli Rosenbaum later described him as having an "almost  unbelievable callousness and disregard for human life."
The FEF, the Schiller Institute, and the Huntsville crowd campaigned to restore  Rudolph's citizenship.
The old-timers were increasingly nervous because two  more from their ranks.
Dieter Grau and Gunther Haukohl, had come under OSI  investigation for their role at Mittelwerk.
The FEF warned that "hundreds" of  Operation Paperclip scientists were under investigation, but this was denied by  the OSI.
An Old-Timers' Defense Fund was established, and a petition was sent to  President Reagan asking him to help Rudolph.
Major General J. Bruce Medaris  (ret.)
, former chief of the U.S. Army Ordnance Command, Baltic and Ukrainian  emigre groups.
The Spotlight, and the neo-Nazi magazine Instauration all lent  their support.
A delegation from Huntsville met with White House  communications director Patrick Buchanan.
Rudolph's most outspoken supporter was Friedwardt Winterberg of the FEF.
A  student of former Nazi physicist Erich Bagge after the war, Winterberg felt  strongly that Rudolph was a victim rather than a victimizer.
He launched his own  investigation and sent letters of protest to Ed Meese and other administration  officials on Desert Research Institute stationery.
He also gave an interview to  The Spotlight repeating the LaRouche line that an attack on Rudolph was an  attack on NATO.
Winterberg also sent handwritten notes (he called them  "brainteasers") to OSI prosecutor Rosenbaum focusing on such themes as:  Israel is guilty of Nazi-style crimes; Simon Wiesenthal was a Nazi collaborator;  Zionism is a form of Nazism that has "infected" world Jewry.
EIR published an article by General Medaris: "Stop the OSI's Assault against  German-American Scientists!"
Editorials in New Solidarity described Rudolph as  an American "patriot" and suggested that OSI prosecutors were Soviet agents  and "traitors" who perhaps should be executed for treason.
Their activities were  said to be a plot to undermine the SDI by demoralizing and deporting America's  brilliant cadre of Peenemunde scientists.
The Schiller Institute expanded the list  of patriotic martyrs to include John (Ivan the Terrible) Demjanjuk of Treblinka  fame; Karl Linnas, the butcher of the Tartu death camp; and Tscherim  Soobzokov, a Waffen SS mass murderer whose attorney, Michael Dennis, was  also LaRouche's attorney.
(Just why autoworker Demjanjuk, construction  surveyor Linnas, and Paterson, New Jersey, ward heeler Soobzokov were vital to  SDI was never explained.)
In 1985 the old-timers held their fortieth reunion at the Alabama Space and  Rocket Museum beneath a giant picture of von Braun.
Linda Hunt, a former  Cable Network News reporter, recalled a darkened auditorium full of aging Nazis  eagerly watching a slide show of the latest laser-beam weapons.
She said that  when the lights went on, the FEF's Marsha Freeman went to the front and  delivered a tirade against the OSI to hearty applause.
This event was mild compared with the Krafft Ehricke Memorial Conference held  that year in Reston, Virginia.
Sponsored by the FEF and the Schiller Institute, it  united support for SDI, defense of Nazi war criminals, glorification of  Peenemunde, and a messianic vision of the conquest of outer space.
Fusion  boasted that participants included "military, scientific, and diplomatic  representatives from four continents."
Former top Nazi scientist Hermann Oberth  sent greetings from West Germany hailing Ehricke's "vision of 'Homo Sapiens  Extraterrestris,' " the New Man who would leave behind the "flaming harbors of  the Earth."
Speakers included Admiral Zenker and Peenemunde rocketeer  Konrad Dannenberg.
LaRouche gave the keynote address, entitled "Krafft  Ehricke's Enduring Contribution to the Future Generations of Global and  Interplanetary Civilization."
Resolutions were passed calling on President  Reagan to adopt LaRouche's crash program for SDI and halt the Justice  Department's investigation of the old-timers.
Since the only old-timers being  probed were those who allegedly served at Mittelwerk, the FEF/Schiller Institute's     hoopla about underground factories on the moon and the spirit of Peenemunde  in space technology was suggestive, at the least.
Over the next two years LaRouche assumed Krafft Ehricke's mantle.
He outlined  plans for cities on Mars and in the asteroid belt — an extension of his earlier  earthbound citybuilding schemes so reminiscent of the SS plans for Aryan  colonies in occupied Russia.
His prototype design for a space city was based on  the geometry of cosmic spirals.
He said his inspiration had come from the work of  German scientists who, at the end of the war, while "awaiting reassignments"  (presumably to the Redstone Arsenal) had amused themselves by drawing up  plans for rebuilding the Ruhr.
While thus dreaming of a new Ruhr on Mars, LaRouche did not forget the Green  Steppes of Earth.
In a speech at a September 3, 1 987, EIR seminar in Munich,  he claimed that when he promoted SDI in the early 1980s he had intended it only  as the first stage in the most awesome revolution in the history of military  technology — the development of "mass-killing" weapons using the "full range of  the electromagnetic spectrum."
Such weapons would make possible the "true  total war."
Aimed eastward, they could fry the entire Soviet population while  leaving Soviet factories and railroads intact.
LaRouche told his audience of  military officers and Bavarian defense contractors that whoever develops  microwave weapons first can "dominate this planet."
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
PART FOUR: Building a l\/lovement   "It was really a treat . . . to follow the perplexity and helplessness of  our adversaries in their perpetually vacillating tactics. . . .They  called on their adherents to take no notice of us and to avoid our  meetings.
And on the whole this advice was followed."
—ADOLF HITLER on the rise of the Nazi Party   Chapter Eleven   More American than Apple Pie   In the mid-1970s the LaRouchians started to build a nationwide election  machine.
At first it grew slowly, hampered by their rhetoric about Rockefeller-CIA  conspiracies and their hesitancy to run candidates in major-party primaries.
But  their percentage of the vote grew dramatically once they began to participate in  Democratic primaries.
They gained the financial support and even the  organizational allegiance of thousands of discontented Americans.
Like earlier  far-right groups such as the John Birch Society, they attracted many senior  citizens and economically troubled farmers and small businessmen.
They also  reached out to blue-collar workers and inner-city blacks.
By 1984 the  LaRouchians were fielding more candidates, gaining more votes, and raising vastly more money than any other extremist sect in America.
The LaRouche election machine contested almost 4,000 Democratic primaries  and general elections in over 30 states between 1982 and 1988.
Its fund raisers  brought in tens of millions of dollars while its candidates attracted over 4 million  votes, including voting percentages above 10 percent in hundreds of contests.
In  at least 70 statewide, congressional, or state legislative races, LaRouche  candidates polled over 20 percent of the vote.
At least 25 appeared on the  general election ballot as Democratic nominees, either by defeating a regular  Democratic opponent or by running in the primary unopposed.
Although none  was actually elected to any public office higher than a local school board,  hundreds won Democratic Party posts (mostly county committee seats) across  the country.
This election machine grew out of the U.S. Labor Party, an NCLC electoral arm  founded in 1971 and disbanded when the LaRouchians entered the Democratic  Party in 1979.
Most of the USLP's youthful candidates and campaign workers  were NCLC cadre with few ties to outsiders.
They often sounded ludicrous with  their warnings of imminent nuclear war, famine, and plague.
But occasionally a     USLP candidate would impress reporters witli wliat appeared to be a sober  grasp of economics.
Paul Gallagher, who ran for governor of New York in 1978,  issued a position paper on how the New York business community could take the  lead in a "national export boom."
He promised that if elected he would "defend  the dollar."
In 1974 the USLP ran 33 candidates for major public office in 1 1 states, receiving  65,000 votes.
In 1976 it sponsored 140 candidates in 21 states.
Many were  knocked off the ballot, but the number remaining was still greater than all other  small leftist parties combined and greater than any single right-wing minor party.
Although LaRouche received only 40,000 votes for President, the total vote that  year for all USLP candidates running for major public office (Congress and up)  was 154,000 — more than any party of the radical left but less than the right-wing  American Party.
In 1 978 the USLP ran 72 candidates in 1 7 states, taking the total  number of USLP candidates between 1974 and 1979 (including those knocked  off the ballot) well over 300.
Most of this was the work of fewer than 500 NCLC local and regional cadres.
In  some cities virtually every NCLC member ran for office, year after year.
Their  compulsive electioneering was a source of amusement to other radical sects, yet  the LaRouchians were gaining invaluable experience: They learned how to fill up  nominating petitions rapidly, efficiently, and with a minimum of invalid signatures.
They learned how to fend off petition challenges and, conversely, how to kick  rivals like the Communist Party off the ballot.
Their in-house lawyers and  paralegals learned how to challenge local authorities over such issues as access  to shopping malls and the right to use bullhorns on street corners.
The USLP  candidates mastered the tricks of campaigning on a shoestring budget.
For  instance, they submitted letters and op-ed pieces to local dailies and cadged  invitations to appear on radio talk shows and cable TV.
They also staged small  but noisy demonstrations claiming that local police were persecuting them.
When  daily newspapers still ignored them, they went to neighborhood or ethnic  weeklies, whose reporters sometimes were more desperate for a story or simply  more gullible.
USLP candidates also met with local trade union officials to request  endorsements, something that most other radical groups rarely bothered to do.
In the 1970s radical sects such as the Communist Party and the Socialist  Workers Party ran candidates chiefly for propaganda purposes, concentrating on  the higher offices such as governor or mayor.
Knowing they could not win, they  rarely did much campaigning.
But the USLP filed for minor public offices and  campaigned seriously, A 1977 report from the Richmond, Virginia, USLP local  claimed that its City Council slate had scheduled more than a dozen meetings  with community groups and trade union officials, as well as appearances on  three radio talk shows.
The memo urged party members in other cities to field     City Council candidates, since sucli contests furnisli "virtually pre-set meetings  for exposure of the USLP program."
Most USLP candidates were lucky to get 1 or 2 percent of the vote.
Although  voters will often give the benefit of the doubt to an outsider in the Democratic or  Republican primary, they are reluctant to throw away their vote on a fringe party  in the general election.
Still the USLP did better than most fringe parties.
A 1979  survey by the Manhattan weekly Our Town identified over two dozen races in  seven states and the District of Columbia where USLP candidates picked up  between 8 percent and 31 percent of the vote for everything from local school  board to U.S. Congress.
One Virginia USLP congressional candidate received  over 10 percent in three successive elections.
These results did not reflect any groundswell of support for the USLP's politics.
In  most of the congressional races in which USLP candidates edged beyond the  usual minor-party totals, their opponent was a Democratic incumbent with no  Republican opponent.
They would thus pick up the knee-jerk protest vote.
Also  they were often listed on the ballot as "Independents" rather than "USLP."
The  municipal and school board elections in which they did well were usually  nonpartisan contests in which all names on the ballot were listed without party  affiliation.
Nobody told the voters who the USLP candidates were, or that they  were extremists.
Many voters pulled the lever for them at random.
In some cities the USLP attempted to exploit emotional public issues.
During  Boston's intense white ethnic opposition to school busing in 1974, the USLP  fielded a congressional candidate in a district that included the anti-busing  stronghold of South Boston.
After denouncing busing as a Ford Foundation plot,  he received 10.7 percent of the vote.
Two years later the son of a former Ford  Foundation vice president ran as the USLP's senatorial candidate in  Massachusetts.
Although he received fewer than 5,000 votes.
New Solidarity  boasted that he had done well in South Boston.
In Baltimore, USLP candidate Debra Freeman appealed openly to racist and anti-  Semitic sentiments in her 1978 campaign against incumbent Congressman  Parren Mitchell, chairman of the Black Congressional Caucus.
Freeman, who is  white, described Mitchell as a "house nigger" for Baltimore's "Zionists" and an  example of "bestiality" in politics.
Her campaign literature carried headlines like  "End 200 Years of Zionist Slave Trading in Black Commodities."
She won more  than 1 1 percent of the vote, doing especially well in several white precincts.
In early 1979, LaRouche announced his second run for the presidency.
He called  himself the "candidate more American than apple pie" and toured the Midwest,  speaking before chambers of commerce and civic clubs.
He attempted to keep  his rhetoric low-key, but his real views sometimes erupted.
"If I had been  President in 1973, and they had tried to do that [Watergate] to me ... I would     have smashed them," he told the Government Relations Roundtable of the  Detroit Chamber of Commerce.
LaRouche began his campaign under the U.S. Labor Party banner, but by mid-  1979 he recognized the futility of fringe-party electioneering and announced he  would enter the New Hampshire presidential primary to appeal to the "silent  Republican majority."
Although he had not lived in New Hampshire since the age  of ten, he called himself a "native son" candidate.
LaRouche's plan centered on his greatest asset — a devoted band of disciples  who could be deployed anywhere in the United States on short notice to work  sixteen hours a day without salaries while being housed and fed at minimal cost.
Their legwork would compensate for his initial lack of a New Hampshire political  base.
To overcome his lack of name recognition he would start campaigning  early, crisscrossing the state and holding "town meetings" in even the smallest  villages.
He would emphasize his French-Canadian descent, thus winning the  sympathy of the state's largest ethnic minority.
He would flood the state with  campaign literature produced at low cost by the NCLC's in-house printing and  typesetting facilities in Manhattan.
The sum total of these efforts would invest the  campaign with enough excitement — and the appearance of enough legitimacy —  to attract local volunteers.
Then, in the final weeks, LaRouche would bring in  hundreds of NCLC members, including the entire national office staff.
The result  might not be as dramatic as Senator Eugene McCarthy's New Hampshire  crusade in 1 968, but LaRouche figured he could win 1 or 1 5 percent of the  vote — enough to gain celebrity status and a chance for financial backing from  Texas oilmen.
In August, LaRouche sent in an advance team to open his Manchester  headquarters.
He made his first campaign tour in early September.
At this point,  most observers assumed he would enter the Republican primary, traditional  magnet for right-wingers.
Instead LaRouche declared himself a Democrat.
The decision was shrewd on both tactical and strategic grounds.
The far right of  the Republican Party was crowded with people who mostly disliked LaRouche.
The Birchers in particular regarded him as a dangerous poacher and had  repeatedly raised questions about his Trotskyist past.
Most of the radical right in  any case was supporting Ronald Reagan, and would have perceived LaRouche  as an annoying diversion if not a spoiler.
For his own part, LaRouche had no  desire to harm Reagan's campaign.
He already believed Reagan would be the  next President, and hoped to gain influence with him.
By contrast, the Democratic Party lacked an organized right wing.
LaRouche  could have the territory all to himself — a domain of millions of conservative-  minded voters seething with anger.
These were conservatives of modest income  and status, which is why they stayed in the Democratic Party rather than joining  their more prosperous Republican brethren.
They were the ones hardest hit by     high interest rates, unemployment, and street crime.
They had already revolted  once to support George Wallace in 1968.
Although most had returned grudgingly  to the fold, the party leadership had lost touch with them during the following  years.
Nothing revealed this more clearly than the fact that all three major  primary candidates in 1980 — President Carter, Massachusetts senator Ted  Kennedy, and California governor Jerry Brown — stood to the left of center.
LaRouche thus could present himself as the voice of the party's forgotten wing,  the proverbial common man.
He could also use this guise to reach out to the  mass of Democrats who were neither conservative nor liberal — the trade union  members, small farmers, and churchgoing inner-city blacks that the USLP had  courted for years.
By addressing their social problems in stark, angry rhetoric, he  could perhaps nudge some of them into a new formation — a LaRouche wing of  the party.
In New Hampshire, LaRouche attacked the liberals with gusto.
The Democratic  primary, he said, was a "Mad Hatter's tea party" dominated by Jane Fonda and  her "antinuclear bacchanal" and by "Zen Buddhist governor Jerry Brown."
LaRouche appealed to those sturdy "nation builders," the construction workers at  the Seabrook nuclear power site.
Vote for me, he said, and I'll build 2,500 nuclear  plants by the year 2000.
He also presented himself as a champion of "traditional"  American values.
"No one is going to grow a field of marijuana" in a LaRouche  America, he said.
"We'll spot it down to one stalk, and the next day we'll be in  there with paraquat. . . .We can put this country on cold turkey."
LaRouche exchanged the academic bow-tie look he had affected during his 1976  campaign for three-piece business suits, yellow-tinted designer glasses, and a  Texas Stetson.
He dropped in at local VFW posts, spoke at Rotary and Kiwanis  luncheons, met with leaders of the Franco-American community's Richelieu  clubs.
By November he had the second-largest campaign staff among  Democratic candidates, with offices in eight towns.
He bought newspaper,  broadcast, and billboard advertising on the scale of a major candidate.
His  campaign events drew respectable crowds.
But the scheme had a major problem: The LaRouche organization was as cultish  as ever, and LaRouche's personality continued to be volatile.
To expect either  the organization or LaRouche to maintain a strictly pragmatic stance even for a  few weeks, to say nothing of an entire campaign season, was not realistic.
Things began to unravel when New England newspapers picked up on a New  York Times series about LaRouche's anti-Semitism and links to the Ku Klux Klan.
Most articles reported this information in a low-key manner and without much  detail.
LaRouche could have simply ignored the charges and gone on  campaigning for nuclear power.
Or he could have issued a statement pointing out  that many of his campaign aides were Jewish and that his contacts with the Klan  were a legitimate part of his work as publisher of a political intelligence  newsmagazine.
Instead, his followers went into a frenzy, claiming that a Zionist  disinformation campaign was afoot — the first stage of a plot to assassinate     LaRouche.
He marched into the Manchester Union Leader with armed  bodyguards and threatened to "make it very painful" for a reporter.
His guards  took the hubcaps off his car as a precaution against bombs.
His campaign  workers made hundreds of harassing phone calls to New Hampshire state  officials and Democratic Party leaders at all hours of day and night.
The LaRouchians also alienated public opinion by their almost gleeful  exploitation of loopholes in the state's election law — including the absentee ballot  provisions.
LaRouche organizers rounded up low-income senior citizens in the  industrial towns of southern New Hampshire and took them to the city clerk's  office.
There, they had the seniors fill out voter registration forms, get the forms  properly certified, and then request and fill out absentee ballots on the spot.
According to Manchester city clerk Joan Walsh, the LaRouchians even helped  the seniors mark the ballots.
Newspaper articles suggested that many who filled  out the absentee ballots did so out of fear.
Local police received several  complaints about LaRouchian canvassers harassing and intimidating seniors.
Meanwhile a LaRouche aide appeared at the office of the New Hampshire  secretary of state to ask blithely for 3,000 absentee registration forms.
When the  request was refused, the LaRouchians printed their own forms.
By primary day LaRouche's Grand Design for New Hampshire was in disarray.
After spending over a million dollars, he received only 2,300 votes, about 2  percent of the Democratic primary total.
Although this was a larger vote than  either Senator Bob Dole or former Texas governor John Connally received in the  Republican primary, it devastated LaRouche's followers, who had actually  expected him to win.
They charged that election officials had tampered with the  voting machines to erase tens of thousands of LaRouche votes.
Leaflets referred  to New Hampshire as "Peyton State," the center of Yankee blueblood scandal  and corruption.
LaRouche went to court to demand a recount.
When it was  performed, he gained only 19 votes.
By mid-March, the LaRouchians had calmed down and were ready for more  primaries.
With the help of Teamster officials, LaRouche campaigned hard in  Illinois and Wisconsin, sending Helga to Milwaukee to charm the German-  American community.
In Texas he held a press conference in front of the Alamo  to call for a square deal for the nation's farmers.
He told his followers to hang in  there — he'd emerge as the dark horse at the national convention.
Most Democratic Party officials regarded the LaRouche campaign as a joke after  New Hampshire.
This view was not justified, for although LaRouche failed to gain  a single convention delegate, he demonstrated his organization's electioneering  skills and its potential for the future.
He qualified for the primary ballot in fifteen  states, including some with strict ballot access laws.
He received 185,000  votes — over four times his 1976 total.
In Connecticut he outpolled Jerry Brown by  more than a thousand votes.
He won endorsements and other campaign  assistance from a number of trade union officials and farm leaders in the     Midwest, Texas, and California.
And, most important, lie received over lialf a  million dollars in federal matching funds — the first extremist candidate to get a  penny.
LaRouche also gained name recognition.
Millions of Americans viewed his half-  hour network television ads in which he described himself as a Democrat in the  mold of Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
Daily newspapers published scores of  articles about him.
People magazine ran a full-page picture of LaRouche with  pipe smoke swirling around his head, and said he had mounted what was  possibly the "best-organized" fringe campaign in American history.
Most of the  media portrayed LaRouche as a mysterious figure who borrowed ideas from both  the left and the right to express his anger about current economic conditions and  his hostility to the Eastern Establishment — not a bad image for a man who  aspired to capture the attention of the old George Wallace constituency.
When LaRouche requested floor passes for the national convention in New York,  the party leadership turned him down, concerned as it was about possible  disruption.
Otherwise, the party leadership showed very little concern over his  invasion of the party.
His nominating petitions went unchallenged in most states  and no one objected strongly to his calling himself a Democrat.
In Texas he was  allowed to address the state convention.
The media continued to be  unsympathetic and the party leadership contemptuous, but this was something  LaRouche had already prepared his followers to accept and take advantage of:  "an intensive 'soft' containment that is not an effective containment."
The way to  handle such a situation, he said, is to just keep plugging away, building up an  intangible cumulative influence "on the other side of the containment wall."
At the  convention this took the form of seminars for delegates, appearances before  state caucuses, a flood of position papers, a daily convention newspaper, and a  coalition with the American Agricultural Movement to publicize an anti-Carter  "Open Convention" strategy.
Lyndon LaRouche had grabbed hold of the  Democratic donkey's tail, and he was not about to let go.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Twelve   The Gotterdammercrats   Shortly after the 1980 Democratic convention LaRouche informed his followers  that the NCLC was in the two-party system to stay.
Having already disbanded the  U.S. Labor Party, he now announced a "multi-candidate political action  committee" that would work to eventually capture control of the Democratic Party.
He called it the National Democratic Policy Committee (NDPC), a name falsely  suggesting a link to the official party leadership.
The NDPC got off to a roaring start with a rally in Huntsville, Alabama, to Hang  Paul Volcker (the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board and a favorite target of  the ultra-right).
But before the LaRouchians could develop this campaign very far,  they became preoccupied with figurative lynchings in their own ranks.
First  LaRouche declared war on his own chief of staff, Gus Kalimtgis, blaming him for  the New Hampshire debacle.
Kalimtgis and several other top NCLC members  quit.
Then LaRouche went after the Detroit regional leadership, accusing them of  insufficient zeal.
Virtually the entire Detroit membership resigned.
In the midst of  this, the organization was able to field only one Democratic primary candidate in  1 981 — Melvin Klenetsky for mayor of New York.
New York's Democrats could have taken vigorous action against this incursion,  setting a nationwide example of how to handle LaRouche.
Local leaders could  have filed suit to keep Klenetsky off the ballot, on grounds that the NDPC's  racism and anti-Semitism violated everything the Democratic Party stood for.
They could have challenged his petitions.
They could have denied him the floor  at clubhouse candidates' forums.
They could have urged the legitimate  Democratic candidates not to participate in debates with him.
But none of this was done.
As U.S. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D.-N.Y.)  said, recalling the Klenetsky campaign in a 1986 speech about LaRouche: "To  the disgrace of our party — the oldest political party on earth, and from the first a  democratic party — no effort . . . was made to keep these fascists out of our ranks  and off our ballot.
To the contrary, rumor had it that in some circles they were  welcomed: the more confusion, the better."
Moynihan was referring to the fact that Mayor Edward I. Koch's 1981 reelection  campaign had regarded Klenetsky as a useful buffer between the mayor and  Assemblyman Frank Barbaro, the main challenger.
The Koch campaign  encouraged Klenetsky's participation in public forums and debates to prevent the  public from seeing the campaign as a one-on-one contest between Koch and     Barbaro and to prevent the latter's criticisms of Kocli from being given a serious  liearing.
Wlien Barbaro cliallenged Klenetsky's petitions, lie received no lielp from Kocli.
Wlien Barbaro protested against Klenetsky's inclusion in the debates, Koch  insisted that Klenetsky be included.
When Barbaro raised the issue of  Klenetsky's membership in an anti-Semitic organization, Koch remained silent.
Koch could not claim ignorance.
Reports of LaRouche's anti-Semitism had been  widespread in the New York media for years.
The Anti-Defamation League had  denounced the LaRouche organization for injecting "anti-Semitic poison into the  American political bloodstream."
The Manhattan weekly Our Town, usually read  carefully at City Hall, had published a twelve-part series delving into LaRouche's  neo-Nazi proclivities.
Koch's own police department had prepared several  intelligence reports that carefully documented LaRouche's extremism.
Klenetsky was careful not to seem to be a tool of Mayor Koch.
His campaign  literature included the slogan "Stop Crazy Eddie — His Policies Are Insane."
But in  the debates and newspaper interviews his main role was to redbait Barbaro,  something that Koch hesitated to do on his own.
The pro-Koch New York Times  went along with this tactic to defeat real estate industry foe Barbaro.
Although a  1979 Times editorial had denounced the LaRouchians as a menace, this fact  disappeared into an Orwellian memory hole.
Klenetsky was given what for a  fringe candidate was an extraordinary amount of coverage, depicting him as  almost a legitimate Democrat.
The Times quoted him as warning New Yorkers  that Barbaro's backers "include the bulk of the Socialist and Communist Party  forces in New York."
In an even lower blow, the Times reported two days before  the election that Klenetsky had accused "some Barbaro supporters of anti-  Semitism"!
A pleased Mayor Koch then told the Times: "Klenetsky, he's not as  bad as his rhetoric; Barbaro is as bad as his rhetoric."
Klenetsky ended up with  the votes of 25,000 New Yorkers — 5 percent of the primary turnout.
The Klenetsky campaign set the stage for the national growth of the NDPC, by  establishing the principle that its candidates could run in Democratic primaries as  legitimate Democrats without significant opposition.
It was a cynical LaRouche  masterstroke: Use a Jewish follower to drive the opening wedge, and do it in the  heart of enemy territory.
Psychologically, LaRouche was operating from a  position of strength — his utter contempt for the Koch machine as shortsighted  "empiricists" who could be manipulated at will.
Indeed, with Koch compromised,  LaRouche received an additional bonus: the silence of the Jewish community.
Not one mainstream Jewish organization spoke out against the legitimization of  Klenetsky and the NDPC.
In effect, many had acquiesced in the new dogma of  neoconservatism: It's okay to ally oneself with fascists against the main enemy,  the left.
In 1982 the NDPC sponsored several dozen candidates around the country.
Klenetsky ran again, this time as Senator Moynihan's sole challenger in the New  York primary.
Moynihan, one of the Democratic Party's few intellectuals, took  seriously the fact that the LaRouche movement represented a homegrown fascist  ideology.
Although Klenetsky was no threat to his reelection, he decided it would  be a disgrace to sit back and allow the LaRouchians to gain further legitimacy in  the party.
He challenged every one of Klenetsky's 30,000 petition signatures,  narrowly failing to remove him from the ballot.
He also roundly denounced the  LaRouche movement's anti-Semitism, and ended up spending $1 .3 million on the  primary.
Klenetsky waged a vigorous campaign.
He obtained the endorsement of one of  the state's most powerful labor leaders, John Cody, president of Teamster Local  282 on Long Island, as well as several Laborers International Union officials.
He  raised over $100,000 for newspaper, radio, and TV advertising, including a half-  hour on New York City's ABC affiliate.
In a half-page ad in the Amsterdam News,  New York's most important black weekly, he accused Moynihan of racism (in  spite of the LaRouche organization's own ties to the Ku Klux Klan) and listed  endorsements by black ministers across the state.
On primary day Klenetsky  polled 162,000 votes statewide, of which 95,000 came from New York City.
His  statewide vote percentage was three times that of his 1981 mayoral primary  campaign.
His New York City vote total was four times his mayoral primary total.
Moynihan recalled being unable to get media help in unmasking Klenetsky.
Most  newspapers dismissed the LaRouchians as kooks, he said.
Only two dailies in  the state published editorials warning about what the NDPC candidate stood for.
Compounding this media problem, Moynihan received a letter from the  Committee on Decent Unbiased Campaign Tactics (CONDUCT) demanding how  he could defend calling Klenetsky anti-Semitic.
CONDUCT was concerned, the  letter said, "that issues of bigotry would become an issue in anyone's campaign."
CONDUCT was no LaRouche front organization but a coalition of prominent New  Yorkers including R. Peter Straus, Rabbi Balfour Brickner, Bishop Paul Moore,  Jr., and Howard Squadron, former chairman of the Conference of Presidents of  Major Jewish Organizations.
"It was bad enough to be running against a fascist,"  Moynihan said.
"What if the respectable people of New York suddenly took the  fascist's side?"
Moynihan's attorney prepared a several-hundred-page brief, and  CONDUCT finally exonerated Moynihan.
(According to Straus, the watchdog  committee also called in Klenetsky, questioned him closely, and found him to be  "far off base.")
With the exception of Moynihan, Democratic Party leaders across the country  ignored the NDPC during 1982.
This contributed to strong electoral showings for  several LaRouche candidates.
Steve Douglas polled 19 percent in the  Pennsylvania gubernatorial primary, coming in second out of four.
A Minnesota  NDPC congressional candidate — Pat O'Reilly, former state president of the  American Agricultural Movement — picked up 32 percent.
Debra Freeman, the     terror of Baltimore's alleged Zionist slave traders, made her second  congressional bid, this time against incumbent Barbara Mikulski.
Freeman  replaced Jew-baiting with lesbian-baiting, publicizing allegations of an affair  between Mikulski and a staff aide.
Freeman's radio ads featured a babble of  monkeys, baboons, and hyenas, supposedly representing Mikulski's moral  character.
"Vote Freeman, Vote Straight Democrat," the NDPC's literature urged.
With these tactics.
Freeman polled 19 percent on primary day.
Only one major newspaper in the nation took the NDPC's 1982 gains seriously.
The Baltimore Evening Sun published a hard-hitting series on Freeman's political  views and campaign finances.
"We would like to hope," said a Sun editorial, "that  even the 19 percent who voted for her were unaware of the dark impulses and  exploitations that lurked behind her campaign."
The voters got the message: In a  race for Baltimore City Council President the next year.
Freeman came in last of  five, with only 2 percent of the vote.
LaRouche was heartened by the nationwide results in 1982 and decided to  attract new blood into the NDPC via a grassroots "candidates' movement."
His  followers advertised for and recruited hundreds of Americans with  ultraconservative views to run for public office.
These candidates — senior  citizens, small businessmen, blue-collar workers, and, especially, farmers — were  given quickie indoctrination sessions and thrown into the primaries.
The NDPC  didn't expect them to understand and defend the full LaRouche ideology, only  simple points like the war on drugs, beam weapons, emergency aid for farmers.
The NDPC had nothing to lose if some of the candidates proved unreliable.
But if  they remained loyal, LaRouche could take credit for their successes.
He carried his plan to the 1983 American Agricultural Movement convention in  Nashville and a subsequent AAM rally in Georgia.
Farmers were suffering  through their worst economic crisis since the Great Depression, and thousands  had lost their farms to the banks.
LaRouche proposed his candidates' movement  as a way to fight back: Farmers must "stop seeking out politicians and become  politicians."
They must "run early, run often, run for anything from dogcatcher to  senator."
The Eastern Establishment would try to stop the movement through  media smears and vote fraud, but LaRouche had the answer to that: Just "keep  adding candidates" until the Establishment's control mechanisms break down.
LaRouche estimated that "one thousand candidates around the country" could  provide the nucleus of a mass movement to alter the face of American politics.
By June 1983 the NDPC had recruited over 200 candidates.
Many of them ran as  "beam weapons" slates to promote President Reagan's new Star Wars policy.
A  Wichita, Kansas, woman decided this was God's will.
She quit her job to run for  the City Commission, to "open up channels to develop an 'E' beam in space."
The movement attracted other obvious eccentrics, but it also attracted college  professors, nuclear engineers, trade unionists, and scores of farm activists.
By  the end of the year the NDPC had fielded over 600 candidates in 27 states.
According to NDPC chairman Warren Hamerman, tliey polled a total of 700,000  votes and 27 were elected.
Hamerman's figures were not as impressive as they sounded.
Most of the  candidates ran for Democratic county committee seats with no power or  influence.
Those who were elected mostly ran unopposed.
Very few did any  significant campaigning.
In California an NDPC member was elected to a local  sanitation board and another to a local school board.
But the school board  winner, an elderly man, later repudiated the LaRouchians.
When the NDPC  attempted to capture local school boards in New York and New Jersey, they  stirred up a hornet's nest.
Parents, teachers, community organizations, and local  Democrats in upper Manhattan united under the slogan "Stop the Fascist Cult."
Senator Moynihan supported the coalition and even dragooned Mayor Koch into  co-sponsoring an anti-LaRouche press conference at City Hall.
(Koch, clearly  uncomfortable, edged away from the cameras after mumbling a one-liner,  "They're the pits."
He well knew the ability of LaRouche to exact revenge on  bachelor political figures.)
In New Jersey local newspapers conducted an  intensive educational campaign against LaRouche's "beam weapons" school  board slate.
No NDPC school board candidates were elected in either state.
Incidents during the New Jersey contest suggest that the NDPC was sometimes  recruiting candidates on a fraudulent basis.
Bessie Mae Coleman, eighty-seven,  told a reporter that the NDPC had never obtained her permission to enter her  name as a candidate.
Harding Evans, Sr., a fifty-four-year-old handyman, said  that when the NDPC asked him to run, he thought they were ordinary Democrats.
He and several other candidates dropped out when they learned the facts.
New  Jersey newspapers highlighted these incidents, but most of the 90-odd NDPC  candidates stayed in the race, apparently willing to be associated with the  LaRouche cause.
LaRouche ran for President again in 1984, selecting as his running mate a  farmer, Billy Davis of Mississippi.
Repeating his 1976 tactic, he encouraged the  maximum number of grass-roots candidates who would work for his election  while working for their own.
The candidates' movement was re-christened the  "NDPC's citizens' militia."
According to New Solidarity, recruits were encouraged  to attend "cadre schools" to learn the "science" of politics and listen to seminars  on the "nature of the Russian empire."
The number of NDPC candidates in 1984 jumped to over 2,000 in more than 30  states.
Once again the media ferreted out a few duds but ignored the fact that  many well-educated people of apparently sound mind — people with careers and  families — were willing to run on the NDPC ticket.
These recruits were not all  political novices.
Some had prior experience in the major parties or in the  American Party.
They agreed with LaRouche on some things, disagreed on  others, but were willing to call themselves LaRouche Democrats and support     beam weapons.
They also were willing to accept the risk of being LaRouche-  baited in local newspapers.
fFOOTNOTE 1]   Although no surveys were conducted of the LaRouche candidates movement,  two Furman University professors did the next-best thing.
In 1986 they  interviewed a random sample of the thousands of LaRouche campaign donors  listed with the Federal Election Commission.
Their survey found that LaRouche  contributors tended to be "populist" conservatives, "profoundly uncomfortable  with modern America and susceptible to conspiratorial explanations of their  distress."
To many, LaRouche's views offered "a plausible answer" to the  question of who controls their lives.
"Nearly all," the report said, "now claim to be conservative, with half labeling  themselves 'very' or 'extremely' conservative."
Many expressed affinity not only  for LaRouche but also for traditional rightist groups such as the John Birch  Society.
There was a "uniform dislike" for Ralph Nader and the American Civil  Liberties Union.
Asked whom they regarded as especially dangerous, over half  cited "figures prominent in conspiracy theories . . . such as communists, drug  dealers, Jews, bankers, intellectuals and the mass media."
Two-thirds were fifty-  five or older, male, of WASP or German extraction.
Most were lower-middle-class  people whose income and status lagged behind those of average donors to other  right-wing causes.
They seemed, the report concluded, "to be the remnant of the  'small-town America' of a generation ago."
This report was remarkable on two counts.
First, it revealed a strong similarity  between those surveyed and LaRouche's own parents.
Second, it suggested that  LaRouche had been successful in his long-range plan to reach precisely such  people.
In the mid-1970s he had begun to weave themes into his propaganda  from the traditional rightist groups referred to in the survey, especially the John  Birch Society and the Liberty Lobby.
His 1980 book.
What Every Conservative  Should Know about Communism, identified these people as a major part of his  "constituency," They were the "patriotic conservatives" as opposed to phony  conservative elitists like William F. Buckley.
They were the "truly moral"  conservatives who despised hippies.
Playboy magazine, the Trilateral  Commission, and the bestial advocates of "negritude."
Many of these patriots, he  said, were subscribers to The Spotlight, and a fair number had read W. Cleon  Skousen's The Nal<ed Capitalist.
LaRouche called them the " 'Gideon's Army' of  American nationalism today."
He wrote about them affectionately, but without  illusions regarding their intellectual limitations.
He estimated their numbers at  upward of a quarter million Americans — the "opinion leaders," he said, for a  "similarly inclined population more than a scorefold larger."
As the 1984 primary season unfolded, it seemed as if the NDPC's grass-roots  candidates were indeed beginning to establish themselves as opinion leaders to  influence broader populist circles.
The vote percentages for NDPC candidates  rose dramatically, with dozens receiving over 20 percent in every region of the     country.
In Ohio the NDPC ran candidates in a majority of the state's 21  congressional districts.
In the 7th CD the NDPC won its first contested  Democratic nomination for major public office when family farmer Don Scott  trounced the regular Democrat 23,000 to 15,000.
This CD was heavily  agricultural, centered on the small industrial city of Springfield.
When  Newsweek's editors were seeking a typical American community to celebrate in  their fiftieth-anniversary issue, this is the city they picked   Scott, as described in NDPC literature, was as typical as the district: a "seventh  generation" farmer, married with two daughters, a 4-H Club adviser, and member  of the Covenant Lutheran Church, St. Paris Lions Club, National Farmers  Organization, Knights of Pythias, and Champaign County Pork Council.
The  Columbus Dispatch noted that his victory "could go down in history as the first  major step in legitimizing" the LaRouche organization.
But the national media  ignored the story.
In the November general election the incumbent Republican  spent $194,000 and Scott only $8,000, yet Scott received 46,000 votes— about  24 percent of the total.
(By comparison, Mondale received 63,000 votes, or 31  percent, against Reagan in the same district.)
Scott later was sent by the NDPC  to Europe to speak before LaRouchian audiences.
Scott was not the only NDPC candidate on the Ohio ballot in November.
In the  4th CD they picked up an uncontested nomination.
And in the 8th CD, the NDPC  candidate received 47 percent in spite of an effort by the regular Democrat to  expose his extremism.
Meanwhile, in North Carolina, the NDPC candidate for the  U.S. Senate gained 127,000 votes (15 percent) in a three-way race, coming in  second after former governor James Hunt.
In Oregon the NDPC's U.S. senatorial  candidate won 24 percent in a two-way race.
In Pennsylvania the NDPC  contested twelve congressional seats, receiving 46 percent in the 17th CD and  over 20 percent in four others.
In California an NDPC congressional candidate won 49 percent in a two-way  race.
In Michigan the NDPC candidate in one CD received 26 percent in a three-  way race, coming in second, while in another CD the NDPC candidate polled 33  percent in a two-way race.
In Georgia an NDPC congressional candidate — an  airline pilot — gained 24 percent in a four-way race, coming in second.
He then  won 34 percent in the runoff.
The NDPC later claimed that its candidates, apart from LaRouche himself,  received close to two million votes in 1984, and that 280 NDPC members were  elected to Democratic county committee seats in various states.
However, most  NDPC county committee members did not become active in the party, and  nowhere did the NDPC build caucuses within the local party organizations.
In  lllinois's Du Page County, where dozens of LaRouchians were elected, the party  leadership expected a major battle at the first post-election meeting.
But the  NDPC members just "sat like bumps on a log," according to Truman Kirkpatrick,  a local party official.
Most of them never came back.
The NDPC had more urgent concerns than building county caucuses.
Its  fundraisers were working around the clock to feed the maw of LaRouche's  presidential campaign.
Officially, LaRouche spent about $6 million on the  campaign, including $500,000 in federal matching funds.
It was later estimated  that his organization raised over $30 million that year through various fund-  raising entities.
As in 1980, LaRouche made heavy use of broadcast advertising by purchasing  fourteen half-hour segments on network television as well as thousands of local  radio and TV spots.
In his network speeches, taped at his colonial mansion in  Virginia, he called for sweeping economic changes to pay for a gigantic military  buildup.
He warned that "Henry Kissinger and his friends" were the cause of  America's problems and that he himself had the solution.
After an especially  abrasive LaRouche speech that fall, TV stations around the country received  close to a thousand viewer complaints.
LaRouche was on the ballot in 13 state primaries but received only 178,000  votes.
The only primary in which he received a significant percentage was in  North Dakota, where he and Gary Hart were the only candidates on the ballot.
By  that point LaRouche had been ruled ineligible for more matching funds, because  of his failure to achieve 20 percent of the vote in any primary.
He saw North  Dakota as his one chance to restore his matching-funds eligibility.
According to  New Solidarity, LaRouche bought 998 radio spots, 127 thirty-second TV spots,  and a full-page ad in a Bismarck daily.
His ads also promoted the gubernatorial  campaign of Anna Belle Bourgois, a farm wife and NDPC organizer, in an  apparent attempt to piggyback off her wholesome image.
The result was 12  percent (4,018 votes) for LaRouche and 12 percent (5,180 votes) for Mrs.  Bourgois.
It probably represented the maximum percentage of conscious votes  for LaRouche ever.
When he ran as an independent in 19 states that November,  his total vote amounted to only 79,000.
In the 1984 primary and general elections  combined, LaRouche spent almost $25 per vote.
His failure at the polls did not discourage the NDPC grass-roots candidates.
In  1985, an off year for elections generally, the NDPC claimed to have 500  candidates running for public office and Democratic Party posts.
Once again  Democratic Party leaders and local Democratic organizations prevaricated.
And  once again New York's Mayor Koch, facing another reelection campaign,  attempted to make use of the NDPC.
His aides urged various reporters to give  coverage to the NDPC's Phil Rubinstein and Farrakhan supporter Fred Newman,  both on the mayoral primary ballot.
The Daily News produced a frothy piece,  "Hey, Guys, We're in It Too," in which Rubinstein and Newman were described  as offering voters "a breath of fresh air."
Koch personally called for their inclusion  in the mayoral debates, in the interest of "fairness."
His obvious goal was to  muddy the voters' choice between himself and his two major challengers.
City  Council president Carol Bellamy and Harlem assemblyman Herman Farrell.
(Not  to be outdone in the fairness game, Bellamy also expressed her hope that the     minor candidates would be included.)
But this time, the media didn't bite the bait.
Koch didn't have a Barbaro to scare them with.
Rubinstein remained a minor  candidate and received only a minuscule vote.
The NDPC problem had receded in New York politics because LaRouche had  moved most of his New York followers, including Melvin Klenetsky, down to  Leesburg, Virginia, to run his new national headquarters.
But the NDPC  continued to grow — without any serious resistance — almost everywhere else.
It  was only a matter of time before a combination of circumstances and the NDPC's  hard work produced a major electoral breakthrough.
That breakthrough came in  1986, in the heartland of blue-collar America, Illinois.
[1] New Solidarity articles and interviews in 1983-84 portrayed the NDPC  grassroots candidates as having a variety of political motives and fixations.
An  elderly woman in California complained that the Democratic Party had been  turned into the "party of the giveaways."
She had voted for Reagan in 1980, but  when he was "turned around" by the Eastern Establishment she decided to  support LaRouche as the man with "the ideas to guard our country."
A Florida  trade union official said he'd sensed there was a conspiracy controlling the  country ever since Truman fired MacArthur.
Then he bought a LaRouchian tract  at an airport.
"I felt like I had been granted my salvation; that somebody else was  in touch with some of the same things I was."
An Oregon school board candidate  said that he'd always wanted to transcend the "banality" of his "backwater  community" and fight the good fight against censorship, mistrust, cynicism,  pessimism, prejudice, drugs, television, and thermonuclear terror.
A North  Carolina group home administrator was more down to earth: He just wanted to  bring Star Wars R&D jobs to his hometown.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Thirteen  Tanks Down State Street   The Illinois Democratic Party received the greatest surprise of its history when, in  the March 18, 1986, primary, followers of LaRouche won the nominations for  lieutenant governor and secretary of state.
The LaRouchians were no less  amazed.
Their Chicago contingent hadn't even bothered to watch the election  polls that night, being too busy conducting a mock exorcism in front of the home  of University of Chicago religion professor Mircea Eliade (they claimed he was an  evil warlock).
The following day, Janice Hart, thirty-one, the victor in the secretary  of state contest, announced her plans for a different kind of exorcism targeting  bankers and drug pushers: "I'm going to revive the spirit of Abraham Lincoln and  Genera!
Patton.
We're going to roll our tanks down State Street."
The Democratic candidate for governor, Adiai Stevenson III, announced that he  would not run on the same ticket with Hart and the nominee for lieutenant  governor, twenty-eight-year-old Mark Fairchild.
He described them as neo-Nazis  and said: "There is no room in the Democratic Party for candidates... who preach  anti-Semitism, who cavort with the Ku Klux Klan, and who want to destroy labor  unions."
The following month Stevenson renounced the Democratic nomination  and became the candidate of a hastily organized Illinois Solidarity Party.
The LaRouchian victory became the media sensation of the week.
Janice Hart  was interviewed on Nightline, and LaRouche almost made the cover of  Newsweek.
Chicago Tribune columnist Mike Royko called it "the strangest thing  that's ever happened in an election in my memory."
Syndicated columnist Max  Lerner declared that "this is the face American fascism will wear."
New York's  Senator Moynihan spoke of a failure of the party's political immune system.
LaRouche, in a speech before the National Press Club, described the Illinois  victories as the will of the "forgotten majority."
Farmers and blue-collar workers  were turning to him as the new George Wallace, "the guy who's going to stick it  to them in Washington."
The Democratic Party claimed it was all a fluke.
Two political unknowns running  an invisible campaign had won by narrow margins because voter turnout was  low, because the media failed to warn the public, and because the regular  Democratic candidates neglected to campaign vigorously.
Also, Hart's WASPish  name gave her an advantage over machine Democrat Aurelia Pucinsky among  Chicago's black voters, who were angry at Pucinsky's father and other Polish-  American politicians for dumping on Mayor Harold Washington.
The name factor  also may have helped Hart downstate, where many voters are suspicious of     ethnic Chicagoans.
But any further LaRouchian victories could be easily  prevented with a little party vigilance and voter education.
It was to be expected the Democrats would assert something like this, for their  aim was damage control rather than an objective postmortem.
To perform the  latter would have involved admitting that the party had allowed the LaRouchians  to run amok in its ranks for over six years.
If the Democrats already had a wimp  image from the Mondale debacle, how would this appear to the media?
Undeniably a majority of the LaRouchian votes resulted from accidental  circumstances.
But the Democrats and the media ignored evidence that a  substantial minority of these votes — a portion without which Hart and Fairchild  never would have won — reflected various forms of conscious voter rebellion.
Furthermore, no one examined the fact that the two victors were part of a  statewide NDPC "Warrior Angel" slate, thirty candidates in all, running for  everything from governor to precinct committeeman and adhering to a national  NDPC strategy called, prophetically.
Operation Takeover.
The vote percentages of these other Illinois NDPC candidates (none of whom  faced Polish opponents) reveal the flaws in the only-a-fluke theory.
The figures in  statewide contests included 15.8 percent for U.S. senator, 5 percent for  governor, 22.3 percent for comptroller, and 14 percent for state treasurer.
In  congressional races the figures included 9.1 percent (3rd CD), 14.7 percent (4th  CD), 35.8 percent (6th CD), 12.8 percent (8th CD), 15.6 percent (9th CD), 35.2  percent (10th CD), 15.1 percent (11th CD), 42.5 percent (12th CD).
The total was  over one million votes excluding the 13th and 15th CDs, where NDPC candidates  won the Democratic nominations unopposed.
These vote percentages were commensurate with what an increasing number of  NDPC candidates had gained in Midwest contests between 1982 and 1985.
They  also fit with what NDPC candidates would poll in later Midwest primaries that  year and in Illinois primaries over the following two years.
"How can anyone look  at the record and say this is a fluke?"
asks Chip Berlet, a Chicago journalist who  has tracked the LaRouchians for years.
"Flukes do not increment upwards in a  steady pattern."
Michael McKeon, a pollster who specializes in the attitudes of blue-collar voters,  warned of a possible LaRouche electoral breakthrough in Illinois over a year  before it occurred.
In open-ended interviews with trade union households in  communities plagued by crime and unemployment, he found a growing  willingness to vote for LaRouchian candidates.
Those interviewed had little  knowledge of what LaRouche really stood for, McKeon said, but "were fed up  with the way they believed the two major parties were ignoring them."
Illinois and  national Democratic leaders pigeonholed McKeon's January 1985 report,  regarding it as farfetched.
McKeon was willing to stake his reputation on an offbeat finding because of clear  warning signs in grass-roots elections.
In 1983, the LaRouchians managed to  field 53 candidates in Chicago suburban school board races.
Although failing to  elect anyone, they bounced back in the March 1984 Democratic primaries,  winning 57 suburban county committee seats, including all 31 of the seats they  went after in Du Page County.
Although three out of four of the NDPC candidates  ran for uncontested seats, at least they were willing to run — the party machine  couldn't find anyone.
Meanwhile in the Will County auditor's race, the NDPC  candidate defeated her regular Democratic opponent by over 3,000 votes.
(Will  County had an unemployment rate twice the state average.
Joliet, the county  seat, was a blue-collar town of failed steel mills.
McKeon, who lived there,  described it as "everything Bruce Springsteen sings about.")
The Chicago dailies, which two years later affected so much amazement at the  Hart and Fairchild victories, covered the 1984 victories in detail, with headlines  such as "'LaRouchies' Score Sweep in Du Page" and "LaRouche Party Victories  Chill Du Page Democrats."
But Democratic officials told the Chicago Tribune it  was all a simple case of voter confusion — voters had thought the NDPC was the  Democratic National Committee.
One county chairman even suggested that the  victories of the LaRouchian candidates weren't "necessarily all that bad" if they  "really want to be part of the party and help build the party ... if they are actually  going to go out and support our nominees."
Neither the Democrats nor the media  bothered to ask how a tiny fringe group had persuaded ninety registered  Democrats in a four-county area to run on its ticket for nonpaying, low-prestige  posts while also fielding ten congressional candidates and several candidates for  state and county public office.
(The NDPC claims it ran 114 candidates in Illinois  that year, garnering 220,000 votes.)
In 1 986 the cornerstone of the fluke theory was the assertion that the LaRouche  candidates did little or no campaigning.
Michael McKeon disputed this: "They just  weren't around where the media was," he said.
"Most of the media was out of  contact with the people."
He observed the LaRouchians campaigning in Joliet  months before the primary.
"They knew their target area.
They'd have tables by  the K-mart department store, where the people laid off from the steel mill  shopped.
Their literature was more easily available than Democratic or  Republican brochures."
Listening to their pitch, he sensed they would surprise  everyone in March.
As he later explained to The Washington Post, they had  "taught themselves how to talk to Joe Six-Pack" and were "tapping into the  feelings that are out here in blue-collar America."
Working-class voters are  "tough on crime and hate drug dealers.
They'd like to see them all killed —  Rambo-ed.
This is what the LaRouche candidates have been saying too."
McKeon said that he received many reports of NDPC campaigning downstate.
"They went around in information vans," he said.
"They'd go to farms and talk to  people for hours.
This wasn't a fluke; they seized an opportunity."
Chip Berlet also received numerous reports.
"I was called by Democratic Party  activists all over the suburbs — from Joliet, Glencoe, Batavia.
They wanted  literature to counter them."
Berlet criticized the Chicago media's analysis of the  primary for ignoring the "cumulative" effect of LaRouche organizing over the  previous decade.
"This was never looked at," he said, "because it involved areas  of politics that are usually invisible to the media."
He noted their attempts to form  anti-drug alliances with black churches and mosques and with black weekly  newspapers like the Chicago Defender.
"They'd get rebuffed," he said, "but they  kept coming back."
In the late 1 970s they formed ties with the Laborers Union in  Chicago and downstate officials of the Teamsters union and the Cement Masons  and Plasterers.
Berlet also cited their year in, year out "nitty-gritty" work — fund  raising, selling New Solidarity subscriptions, compiling phone lists of potential  supporters, leafleting in downtown Chicago, manning literature tables at O'Hare  International Airport seven days a week.
He believed that "many thousands" of  1 986 primary voters knew who the LaRouchians were, even if they didn't vote for  them.
The first clear warning signal of their electoral potential came in 1980, when  LaRouche received over 19,000 votes in the Illinois primary.
Although this was  only 1.1 percent of the total, it was half as many votes as California governor  Jerry Brown received.
It was far more votes than Howard Baker, John Connally,  and Bob Dole received in the Republican primary, and almost as many as Illinois  congressman Phil Crane.
Most of LaRouche's votes came from the Chicago  wards, where he received two-thirds the vote of Jerry Brown and more votes than  six out of eight of the Republican candidates.
Indeed, he received almost twice  as many votes in the wards as George Bush.
His slate of 49 convention delegate  candidates, mostly in Chicago and the suburbs, received well over 75,000 votes.
In the predominantly black 2nd CD on Chicago's South Side, LaRouche  delegates received over 35,000 votes.
"The LaRouchians had conducted a  strong anti-drug organizing drive in that district," Berlet said.
"I attended rallies  there in the summer of 1979.
These were mass meetings, hundreds would show  up."
Over the next six years the LaRouchians continued to court black voters.
Sheila Jones, a former Chicago public school teacher and perennial NDPC  candidate, became widely known as their spokesperson in the black community.
In the 1986 primary she received 70,000 votes in the Chicago wards (130,000  statewide) against incumbent Senator Alan Dixon.
When the LaRouchians asserted that they had indeed campaigned hard to win  their 1986 victories, most of the media dismissed this out of hand.
But months  before primary day New Solidarity was already reporting details of the campaign.
For instance, a January 1986 article described a weeklong tour of downstate  Illinois by Mark Fairchild and the NDPC candidate for governor, Peter Bowen, to  speak out on the farm crisis and unemployment.
The article also revealed that  the Illinois NDPC had purchased hundreds of sixty-second radio spots to  publicize its positions on AIDS and the Gramm-Rudman bill.
Voters interviewed after tine primary told tine media tliey liad not known anytliing  about Hart and Faircliild wlien tliey voted for them.
Although the majority of  respondents were doubtless telling the truth, the minority who had known had  good reason not to admit it.
Articles and TV news reports were calling the chosen  candidates of these voters neo-Nazis, neo-fascists, extreme rightists, conspiracy  theorists, kooks, cultists, white-collar crooks, crypto-Communists, and racists.
As  Chip Berlet observed: "Why should an unemployed steel worker or bankrupt  farmer, already seething with resentment against the liberal media, 'confess' to  some yuppie TV reporter and get looked at like he's dirt?"
Robert Albritton, a Northern Illinois University political scientist, analyzed the  election returns county by county.
He found a strong correlation in central and  southern Illinois between the incidence of family farms relative to the population  and voter support for Janice Hart and the NDPC candidate for state treasurer,  Robert Hart.
In the case of Robert Hart (Janice's husband), the relationship was  especially striking.
Democratic voters had three other choices, including an  incumbent and a downstate candidate.
Unlike Janice's opponent, these  candidates campaigned vigorously.
Yet Robert Hart won thirty-five counties down  state.
Most of these were economically depressed, like Johnson County in the  state's far south, where an unusually large percentage of total family income  came from welfare, unemployment, and other government benefits.
Dan Levitas, research director of Prairiefire Rural Action, monitored the NDPC's  farm organizing in Illinois and other Midwest states for more than two years  before the 1986 primaries.
"They'd bring crews out of Chicago.
They'd do a drive-  through of the LaRouche vans with bullhorns where they had people running for  Congress."
Levitas said he'd listened in on weekly LaRouchian radio hook-up  conference calls with farmers.
"They'd take attendance," he said.
"There were  farmers at fifty to seventy-five locations, but the number influenced was much  greater.
You had Mom and Pop listening in, you had people making tapes and  circulating them, you had neighbors gathering each week."
One center for Illinois conference call gatherings was a farm in Fayette County,  where Janice Hart defeated her opponent by more than two to one.
The couple  that sponsored the gatherings, Elbert and Jean Finley, also organized in 1985 an  NDPC rally, attended by about sixty farmers.
Clem Marley, who operates a farm  news service, signed the attendance sheet, and his wife later received a call from  Hart.
LaRouchian agitation among Illinois farmers dates back to 1 974, when the U.S.  Labor Party candidates for governor and lieutenant governor toured southern  Illinois.
According to New Solidarity, they passed out leaflets explaining the  "Labor Party Emergency Food Program," and learned firsthand about farmers'  "bitterness and populist demoralization."
Although the USLP was still too left-  wing for rural America, New Solidarity continued to cover farm issues, gradually  shifting its rhetoric into the populist mold.
During the 1980 presidential primary.
LaRouche sent his agricultural adviser, a Michigan grain farmer, on a tour of  southern and central Illinois, where he was interviewed on TV and radio and met  with many farmers.
In June 1980, LaRouche invited farmers to an all-day  conference at Chicago's O'Hare Hilton, where he talked about agriculture as a  professional economist, downplaying ideology.
A transcript of his  extemporaneous answers during the lengthy question period reveals that he had  thoughtful positions on a wide range of farm issues, which he expressed in  colorful witty language.
Meanwhile, his followers promoted a National Emergency  Agricultural Declaration to maintain federal parity price payments at 90 percent.
They formed an alliance with the American Agricultural Movement, which lasted  through 1983-84 (LaRouche, as noted earlier, addressed AAM activists in 1983).
Throughout the early 1980s — the worst years of the farm crisis — the NDPC  organized farm rallies, participated in farm auction protests, ran farmers for public  office, and sold LaRouchian publications across the rural Midwest.
Farm activists estimate that LaRouchian campaign activities in 1986 reached  only a small fraction of Illinois farm families directly.
But given the depressed  economic conditions and political discontent in rural Illinois in the mid-1980s, that  may have been sufficient to gain a significant protest vote.
According to Susan  Danzer of the Illinois South Family Farm Program, rural areas of the state were  "riddled" with right-wing groups operating informally, without much high-visibility  organizing.
"Farmers in trouble talk to other farmers in trouble," she said.
Leonard Zeskin, the Missouri-based research director of the Center for  Democratic Renewal, said that the interconnections of the various rural extremist  groups make it possible to spread the word quickly about a candidate.
Farmers  active with the NDPC tend also to have ties with the Populist Party, Liberty  Lobby, and Posse Comitatus.
"One hand washes the other," he said.
He noted  that shortly after the primary.
Populist Party leader Robert Weems (a former  Klansman) announced his support for Hart and Fairchild in a front-page article in  The Spotlight.
The murkiness of the LaRouchian relationship to Illinois farmers, and to  downstate Illinois in general, was captured in a report by Tom Johnson, a  freelance researcher for the American Jewish Committee, after a three-day swing  through five central Illinois counties in late March 1986.
He said no one would  admit having voted for the LaRouchians, even though their highest vote  percentages came from this region.
He spoke to one of the NDPC congressional  candidates, a farmer who said he was his "own man" but added: "You gotta have  an organized unit to get enough people thinking the same way. . . .We're facing  the big boys, not the politicians, but them who's running them."
(This farmer later  dropped out of the NDPC.)
Johnson also talked to a Champaign County  Democratic official who said Fairchild and another NDPC candidate had been  "laughed at and greeted with anger" when they appeared at a Forum for precinct  workers.
Yet Hart and Fairchild drew 57 percent and 52 percent, respectively, in  the Champaign County primary.
Although Johnson did not find much evidence of     NPDC campaigning, lie observed conditions tliat suggested a political tinderbox.
"Town after town . . . appears to be a ghost town," he wrote.
"In one small burg of  3,700 we saw ten 'for sale' signs on a single street."
A curious incident the day before the primary showed that the LaRouchians were  well aware of this tinderbox.
A contingent of NDPC demonstrators led by Sheila  Jones invaded the lobby of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.
They unfurled  a banner: "End the Bankers' Dictatorship — Jones for Senate."
The NDPC had  unsuccessfully sought major media attention during the previous week through a  variety of stunts.
In picking the Federal Reserve, a favorite target of right-wing  populists, they knew exactly what they were doing.
Thousands of downstate  farmers would have received a powerful election-eve message if the  demonstration had been reported on TV evening news.
In November's general election the majority of voters no longer could plead  ignorance about Hart and Fairchild.
For over seven months, the two had received  extensive hostile press coverage and had been attacked by campaign literature  of both Republicans and regular Democrats.
But the NDPC candidates  hammered away, albeit in bizarre language, with their message for the "forgotten  majority": Halt farm foreclosures, reopen steel mills, form vigilante groups to  crack down on drug pushers, prosecute banks for laundering money, quarantine  AIDS victims.
By ordinary political standards, the LaRouchians suffered an overwhelming  defeat in November.
Hart received only 15.3 percent of the vote; Fairchild, only  6.4 percent.
No Democratic nominees for major office had ever done so poorly in  Illinois.
Yet by the standards of vanguard extremist politics (in which winning  public office is never the top priority) their campaign was a success.
They drew a  clear line between themselves and the political system, letting the public know  they were at war with the existing order.
They developed a reputation for an  uncompromising spirit.
And Hart received 478,000 votes, over 100,000 more  than in March.
She ran as strongly as the Illinois Solidarity Party candidate  backed by Stevenson and the state Democratic organization.
She received  226,000 votes in Cook County and about 25 percent of the vote in economically  depressed St. Clair, Madison, and Rock Island counties.
Her campaign evidently  had tapped a substantial number of voters who knew who and what she was and  weren't at all bothered by media warnings.
Although her promise to send the  tanks down State Street had sounded strange in March, it may have been the  smartest move of her campaign.
Neither the Democratic Party nor the media, thinking only in mainstream political  terms, drew any serious lessons from the Hart vote.
Outside Illinois most  newspapers reported only the vote percentages, not the totals.
The Democratic  Party announced that LaRouche had been defeated, and that was that.
No one  confronted the plain fact that in a state saturated with anti-LaRouche propaganda  his candidate had received almost a half million votes.
The LaRouchian primary victories were tine pivotal event in Illinois politics in  1986.
Adiai Stevenson III, running on his third-party line, lost to Republican  governor James R. Thompson by 400,000 votes.
Democratic candidates in  general were hurt by the ballot confusion: They had to warn voters to beware of  non-Democrats running as Democrats, and to vote for "real" Democrats on a  non-Democratic line.
The Republicans meanwhile spent $200,000 in Cook  County alone on ads with a simple message: If you don't know who the  LaRouchian candidates are, play it safe by voting straight Republican.
Thus did  Lyndon LaRouche help deliver the nation's sixth most populous state to the  Republicans for four more years.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Fourteen  After Illinois   Despite the nationwide barrage of anti-LaRouclie publicity in tine wake of tine  1986 Illinois primary, NDPC candidates did well in subsequent primaries that  year.
According to the NDPC's own figures, it fielded candidates in 31 states,  including 157 for Congress, 14 for the U.S. Senate, about 50 for state legislative  office, and over 700 for Democratic Party posts (the last figure was probably  inflated).
Although none was elected to public office, ten made the ballot in  November as Democratic nominees (four by winning primary fights, six by filing  for uncontested nominations).
Well over a million Americans voted for NDPC  candidates in the post-Illinois primaries and the general elections.
The Anti-Defamation League compiled the percentage figures for 234 NDPC  primary candidates, not including those for Democratic Party posts.
It found that  119 received from to 10 percent, 60 received 1 1 to 20 percent, 22 received 31  to 30 percent, 16 received 31 to 40 percent, 4 received 41 to 50 percent, 4  received over 50 percent, and 9 were unopposed.
In other words, almost half  received over 10 percent.
Percentages of more than 20 percent were obtained in  every region, from Idaho to Georgia and from New Hampshire to California.
Oklahoma's NDPC candidate for the U.S. Senate, farmer George Gentry,  received 157,000 votes (33 percent) in a two-way race.
This vote probably was  influenced by the fact that Gentry lost his farm in a sheriff's auction shortly before  the primary — an event widely reported in the local media.
In Indiana the NDPC's  senatorial candidate, Georgia Irey, campaigned hard in a two-way race against a  regular Democrat who aggressively publicized key's LaRouche connection.
When a Democratic official said the LaRouchians were like cockroaches that  can't stand the light of day, Irey announced that she was adopting "La  Cucaracha" as her theme song.
Promising action to halt plant closings and farm  foreclosures, she won 93,000 votes (26 percent).
In Iowa, Democrats and trade unionists were shocked when Juan Cortez, a  former member of the Democratic state committee and a past president of Local  231 of the American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees,  announced as the NDPC's senatorial candidate.
In the face of strong attacks on  his LaRouche connection, Cortez gained 17,000 votes, or 16 percent.
Seventeen  counties gave him over 20 percent.
In no county did he receive less than 12  percent.
NDPC candidates gained significant vote totals in other statewide contests.
In  Ohio, farmer Don Scott challenged U.S. Senator John Glenn and received     96,000 votes, or 12.5 percent.
In Texas and Georgia the NDPC candidates for  state Agricultural Commissioner each won 18 percent — 187,000 votes in Texas,  103,000 in Georgia.
Both were farmers; the Texas candidate ran against a well-  known and popular incumbent, James Hightower.
NDPC congressional candidates polled between 20 and 40 percent in 21  contests in California, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Massachusetts, New Hampshire,  Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Texas.
Also, two NDPC candidates picked up  uncontested nominations in Ohio and Texas.
But in New Jersey, where the  Democratic Party conducted an especially strong anti-LaRouche voter education  drive, the NDPC's 13-candidate congressional slate received only 15,473 votes  combined.
On the state legislative level the NDPC won two Michigan state senatorial  primaries.
Both were in Republican-dominated districts where the Democrats had  fielded weak candidates.
In Idaho an NDPC candidate picked up an uncontested  nomination for state representative, then polled 41 percent in the general election  against the Republican incumbent.
In Alaska an NDPC candidate won 1 9 percent  in a state senate primary.
In Texas an NDPC candidate gained an uncontested  Democratic nomination for state assembly, then polled over 20 percent in  November.
The NDPC claimed about 50 victories in races for positions within the Democratic  Party, mostly county committee seats.
In Pennsylvania's Bucks County an NDPC  candidate won election to the Democratic state committee over four regular  Democrats.
In Texas the NDPC fielded over 150 candidates for party posts.
Of  the 16 who ran for county chairmanships, 12 received over 20 percent.
Two  months before the primary a newspaper columnist in Bexar County (San Antonio)  warned that if the Democrats didn't wake up, the LaRouche candidate for county  chairman, Donald Varella, would win.
The columnist pointed out that another  NDPC member had polled 40 percent in the previous Bexar County  chairmanship race (1984).
The local Democrats didn't heed the warning, and  Varella came in first in the 1986 primary.
The party was saved from further  embarrassment only by the fact that Varella was not deeply committed to the  NDPC.
After unfavorable press coverage he dropped out of the race before the  runoff primary, saying that he didn't really want to be county chairman and that  he'd rather "follow the Man to the Cross than a man to Washington."
Varella was not the only NDPC candidate whose link to LaRouche was tenuous.
The Houston Post polled 25 presumed NDPCers who were elected, mostly  unopposed, as county committeemen in Harris County.
Fourteen said either that  they'd had second thoughts about LaRouche or that they'd been unclear about  the NDPC's affiliations from the beginning.
The same phenomenon was found in  other states.
Two NDPC candidates for Congress, nominated unopposed in  Illinois and Ohio, disassociated themselves from LaRouche.
Others, when  questioned by the press, were hesitant to back LaRouche fully.
"I am not a     LaRouche follower," said a General Dynamics technician who won a Michigan  state senate primary.
"I like some of their ideas and they like some of mine."
But other NDPC candidates were less skittish.
Major Robert Patton (USAF, ret.)
,  a U.S. senatorial candidate in New Hampshire, told a local reporter that he  backed LaRouche because whenever "evil rears [its] ugly head . . . LaRouche  strikes with the written word, and it's effective."
An Alabama NDPC candidate for  the state legislature laughed off the media's attacks.
"At first, we were 'followers  of extremist LaRouche, neo-Nazis, blah, blah, blah,' " he told New Solidarity in  mid-May.
"Now, it's gotten to the point where — in the local media, more so than  the national media — we're simply getting straightforward coverage."
Overall, despite the negative media coverage and the Democratic Party's anti-  LaRouche mailings to voters in some states, the NDPC's post-Illinois candidates  in 1986 did better than its 1984 candidates, who had faced almost no media or  party opposition.
But the Democrats made no serious attempt to analyze these  results.
They just noted that the LaRouchians weren't i/iz/nn/ng elections, as if this  would make the hundreds of thousands of NDPC votes disappear.
Democratic  National Committee spokesman Terry Michael cited races in which the NDPC  was held to under 30 percent as proof that the Illinois victories had been a fluke.
The truth was much more complicated.
Although there was indeed a fluke factor  in many NDPC contests, the high NDPC vote totals sometimes were also the  result of hard work and clever demagoguery on volatile public issues.
The fluke  vote itself was not just a matter of voters pulling the lever at random.
The  LaRouchians were selecting their contests carefully, concentrating on  Democratic primaries in staunchly Republican districts where the regular  Democratic candidate was often as obscure as the LaRouchian one.
The local  party leadership didn't care much about the outcome, the voters didn't care, and  the regular Democratic candidate merely went through the motions.
Everyone  knew the Democratic nominee couldn't win the general election anyway.
When NDPC candidates ran against well-known incumbents with no other  primary challenger (e.g., Scott against Glenn in Ohio), they also picked up  significant vote percentages with little effort.
The incumbent couldn't lose, so  again there was little incentive to wage a strong battle against an obscure  challenger.
Voters who didn't like the incumbent — especially conservative  Democrats who regarded him as too liberal — could express their disgruntlement  by voting for the NDPC candidate.
They might not approve of the NDPC's  extremism, but inasmuch as there seemed no danger of the NDPC candidate  actually winning, they would seize the opportunity to "send a message," as  George Wallace used to say.
These tactics involved conscious manipulation of weaknesses within the  Democratic Party.
But artful tricks do not explain everything.
First, the  LaRouchians did well in a number of multi-candidate elections that included well-     known political figures on the ballot.
Second, the high 1986 vote percentages for  LaRouche candidates were mostly in low-turnout primaries.
It is a rule of thumb  in analyzing election returns that the lower the turnout, the higher the political  awareness and socioeconomic status of those who vote.
In other words, the  LaRouchians were often getting support from the voters teasNikely to engage in  fluke voting.
Third, post-Illinois candidates like Georgia Irey in Indiana did well  despite vigorous anti-LaRouche voter education specifically designed to counter  fluke voting.
Fourth, the LaRouchians were striking a chord with angry  conservatives on the AIDS issue.
In California they collected over a half million  signatures in 1986 for an AIDS quarantine ballot initiative.
It garnered 29 percent  of the vote even after LaRouche's role was widely publicized.
In 1986-87 the LaRouchians were placed on the defensive for the first time — not  in the political or ideological arena, but in court.
Top LaRouche aides were  indicted for credit card and loan fraud, while LaRouche himself was indicted for  obstruction of justice.
It seemed for a while that this might be the end of the  NDPC election machine.
But that certainly wasn't the case in Illinois.
NDPC  candidates for city clerk and city treasurer in the 1987 Chicago municipal  primaries received 47,000 and 50,000, respectively, while an NDPC aldermanic  candidate received considerable support in a suburban district.
Elsewhere,  NDPC activity was muted as the LaRouchians reorganized their forces, but by  early 1988 their machine was running smoothly again.
LaRouche ran for  President in more states than ever, including eleven on Super Tuesday.
In  California his followers recruited 205 registered Democrats in 45 congressional  districts to run on his convention delegate slate.
(They did this while also  collecting 731 ,1 66 signatures to place a second AIDS initiative on the ballot.)
LaRouchian fund raising also returned to normal, under the command of the very  people who had been indicted.
By June, LaRouche had gained over $650,000 in  federal matching funds, more than in either of his two previous bids for the  Democratic nomination.
As in 1 984, he did poorly at the polls (receiving only 21 ,979 votes on Super  Tuesday), but NDPC grass-roots candidates did well.
In the 1988 Pennsylvania  primary an NDPC candidate won the Democratic congressional nomination in the  5th CD by a vote of 10,670 to 9,298.
NDPC candidates in the 7th and 10th CDs  received 20 percent and 32 percent, respectively.
In Pennsylvania's U.S.  senatorial primary, NDPC leader Steven Douglas, running in a field of four, polled  146,050 votes, or 13 percent.
Back in Illinois, the NDPC fielded a slate of twenty.
Sheila Jones received 21 percent (1 15,000 votes) in the race for Cook County  recorder of deeds, while NDPC candidates picked up 22 percent in the 4th CD,  38 percent in the 6th CD, 25 percent in the 13th CD.
These Illinois results were  achieved in spite of mailings by the party leadership to registered Democrats in  the targeted CDs and a massive distribution of anti-NDPC brochures in Cook  County.
The NDPC mounted a major effort in Iowa, with candidates for 16 congressional  and legislative seats across the state (up from 4 candidates in 1986).
Phil  Boeder, the state party's communications director, told the Des Moines Register:  "They are the political version of the 'Creature from the Black Lagoon.'
They keep  coming back to haunt us."
The party leadership sent out anti-NDPC mailings and  urged local party organizations to ban NDPC candidates from their candidates'  forums.
Juan Cortez, the NDPC's 1986 senatorial candidate, was held to 1 1  percent in the 2nd CD and the majority of the NDPC candidates received less  than 10 percent.
However, the NDPC candidate in the 1st CD polled 30 percent,  and four NDPC state legislative candidates polled over 20 percent, with a high of  32 percent for a longtime LaRouche farm activist in House District 17.
Prairiefire Rural Action in Des Moines did a county-by-county analysis.
It found  that a majority of the NDPC candidates received over 10 percent in one or more  counties, with their best showings in rural counties and/or their home counties.
It  described as "surprising" the 14 percent vote Cortez received in his home  county, where voters were especially aware of his LaRouche connection.
The  NDPC congressional candidate in the 1st CD received 40 percent or more in five  of the sixteen counties; in three, he received over 45 percent.
His best showing  was in Wapello County, where "LaRouche operatives campaigned aggressively  with door-to-door canvassing and literature distribution efforts."
Comparing the  1986 and 1988 NDPC vote, the report concluded that although no "stable bloc" of  LaRouche voters yet existed, the vigorous exposures of LaRouche in Iowa had  not been entirely effective: "Far too many [voters] chose to support LaRouche-  sponsored candidates in 1988.
And, in the absence of continued vigilance, there  is nothing to suggest that a significant number of lowans won't make the same  mistake again in 1990."
As in previous years, the LaRouchians took advantage of the flabbiness of local  Democratic organizations in strongly Republican districts.
Indeed, by  concentrating on such districts they won more contested primaries in 1988 than  in any single previous year.
And they also picked up several uncontested  nominations in districts where the regular Democrats simply didn't bother to field  anyone.
In Pennsylvania and Ohio, two NDPC candidates picked up  congressional nominations unopposed.
In Indiana, Georgia Irey, the NDPC's  former U.S. senatorial candidate, gained an uncontested state assembly  nomination.
In Iowa, NDPC candidates harvested two state senatorial  nominations without opposition.
The NDPC's surprise of the year was in Harris County, Texas (Houston).
Although LaRouche received only 389 votes for President in Harris County,  Claude Jones, a staunch LaRouche loyalist, was elected Democratic county  chairman.
He defeated the incumbent, Larry Veselka, by a vote of 54,394 to  51 ,318.
In some respects the incident was a replay of Illinois in 1 986.
The local  party leadership and the media again failed to warn the public about the  LaRouche candidate, the regular Democrat again didn't bother to campaign very     much, and everyone again ignored clear warning signals — the strong vote totals  for local LaRouche candidates in several previous elections (for instance, the 26  percent obtained by Harley Schlanger, the leader of the LaRouche Texas  organization, in a 1986 Houston congressional primary).
Although Jones had polled only 5 percent against Veselka in the 1986 county  chairmanship race, LaRouche candidates had done well in other Texas county  chairmanship races that year.
In Houston, of all places, the Democrats should  have remained vigilant.
Harris County is the second-largest election district in the  United States.
It has 664 voting precincts and sends more delegates to the  Democratic National Convention than many states do.
Yet the ousted chairman,  Veselka, defended his decision not to campaign vigorously: It had clashed with  his duties as a trial lawyer, he said.
Houston Democratic leaders put most of the blame on the voters.
"Jones is a  simpler name than Veselka, so people went with the familiar," said the county  committee's executive director.
The argument was similar to that of the Illinois  Democrats in 1986: that voters had chosen a Hart over a Pucinsky.
Houston  Democrats speculated that Jones had deliberately kept a low profile in order to  keep the Democrats asleep at the wheel, so that he, too, could take advantage of  the name factor.
It was also pointed out that the record presidential primary  turnout had included many voters unfamiliar with party officeholders — a theory far  more plausible than the claim by Illinois Democrats that the Hart-Fairchild  victories had been due to a /oi// turnout.
The Democrats got off easy this time.
The county Democratic leadership met  three days after the primary and passed new bylaws stripping the county  chairman of all powers, including the power to write checks and handle funds.
When the full county committee met to approve the new bylaws, the NDPC could  muster only a handful of protesters.
Yet it was sheer luck that the LaRouche  victory had occurred in an intraparty contest rather than in a race for public  office — Jones, unlike Hart and Fairchild, couldn't hurt the Democratic ticket in  November.
The LaRouchian electoral record from 1 974 through 1 988 shows that they have  discovered and learned to exploit hitherto unnoticed weaknesses in America's  two-party electoral system.
And their opportunities for doing so apparently are  expanding.
An August 1988 New York Times article reported a national increase  in the number of uncontested primaries and general elections, reflecting the  growing clout of incumbency, the greater costs of running for office, and the  closer press scrutiny of candidates' personal lives and finances.
In the 1988 New  York elections, the Times said, "at least one of every five members of the House  and Legislature does not have a major party opponent and is thus virtually  assured of re-election in November."
Hence any extremist candidate who  chooses to run on a shoestring budget can pick up a hefty percentage of the vote  and in many cases an uncontested nomination.
Besides LaRouche, other ultrarightists and neo-Nazis recognize tine growing  potential for miscliief.
Robert IVIiles, America's leading old-style white  supremacist, hailed the LaRouchians as "political raiders" after their 1986 Illinois  victories.
Comparing them to Hitler's SS, he said they had wrought "havoc" in the  ranks of "ZOG" (the Zionist Occupation Government).
"Well done, Lyndon, well  done," he crowed.
Former Klansman Robert Weems also praised the NPDC's  feat in a front-page article in The Spotlight.
Leaders of the Populist Party,  electoral arm of the Liberty Lobby, called for a LaRouche-style strategy of  infiltrating major-party primaries.
David Duke, head of the National Association  for the Advancement of White People, announced his candidacy for the 1 988  Democratic presidential nomination.
Like LaRouche, he compared himself to  George Wallace, entered the New Hampshire primary, and applied for  government matching funds.
Lacking a cadre organization such as LaRouche's,  he failed to raise enough money to qualify for federal funds.
But on Super  Tuesday he received 41,177 votes in five states.
Pollster Michael McKeon believes that the electoral activities of extremists like  LaRouche and Duke may "expand exponentially" in the next decade.
Democratic  and Republican Party leaders have failed to offer blue-collar voters credible  solutions to the problems of drugs and street crime.
Neither party has done much  to reverse the decline of traditional smokestack industries or give long-range  hope to America's remaining farm families.
Meanwhile, the parties' traditional  means of reaching the voter, network television, has been undercut by VCR  technology.
"The VCR means people can control information coming into their  homes," said McKeon.
"A lot don't listen to television news anymore.
There's a lot  of networking going on."
McKeon believes that blue-collar voters are looking for  ideas that mirror their frustration.
"You've got couples working in low-wage or  part-time jobs who used to make a good living at a plant that closed down.
It  simmers and simmers.
Fred Flintstone starts picking up on all kinds of strange  notions.
When the Democrats and Republicans get together to tell him not to  vote for a LaRouche candidate, he thinks: What have the Democrats and  Republicans done for me?"
In this new political arena, the old standards of political measurement may prove  inadequate.
In mid-1986, pollster Mervin Field asked registered voters in  California about LaRouche.
Sixty-five percent had heard of him, and 55 percent  had an unfavorable opinion of him.
Field said the score was the lowest he'd ever  found for a politician.
Yet the following November, 2,039,744 Californians voted  in favor of LaRouche's AIDS quarantine initiative.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Fifteen   LaRouche and the Reagan Revolution   During his eiglit years of presidential press conferences, Ronald Reagan often  took questions from Executive Intelligence Review correspondents.
On August 3,  1988, the question and answer created a furor.
EIR's Nick Benton asked the  President if he thought Michael Dukakis should make his medical records public.
Benton was alluding to rumors spread by his own NCLC colleagues that the  Democratic presidential nominee had sought psychiatric help for depression in  the late 1970s.
Reagan, grinning, answered: "Look, I'm not going to pick on an  invalid."
The remark elicited groans of dismay from the assembled reporters, and  Reagan half apologized several hours later.
Yet the President had managed to  transform an unsubstantiated smear into a major international news story.
The  New York Times's Anthony Lewis wrote that "anyone who thinks that crack was  accidental must believe in the Tooth Fairy."
Senator Daniel P. Moynihan used  even blunter language, charging that the "Big Lie" of Lyndon LaRouche had  "reached the Oval Office."
The LaRouchians had started their Dukakis rumors at the convention, with  leaflets that asked, "Is Dukakis the new Senator Eagleton?"
Afterwards they  called daily newspapers around the country, telling each that its competitors were  already hot on the story.
Fearful of being scooped, editors and reporters reacted  predictably.
Dukakis headquarters received a barrage of inquiries.
Although  campaign spokesmen denied everything and the LaRouchians offered no solid  evidence, the rumors became newsworthy simply as rumors.
The weekend  before Reagan's "invalid" quip, several important news outlets had already  reported the story.
The Reverend Moon's Washington Times gave it front-page  coverage with the sly headline: "Dukakis Psychiatric Rumor Denied."
On August  3, a Wall Street Journal editorial noted "rumors about [Dukakis's] depression,"  which supposedly highlighted "how little the American people know about this  man."
Dukakis called a press conference to deny the rumor, and within a few days it  was overshadowed by the story of Dan Ouayle and the National Guard.
Syndicated columnists Rowland Evans and Robert Novak noted that the caper  apparently had backfired by linking Bush to LaRouche more than Dukakis to the  psychiatrist's couch.
They charged that, weeks before the story broke into print,  the "political apparatus of Bush campaign manager Lee Atwater was  investigating the details and trying to spread the findings without leaving any  vice-presidential fingerprints."
The column suggested that Atwater's lieutenants  had "asked outside GOP operatives" to do the dirty work.
There was a potential bombshell here, but most of the media showed the usual  reluctance to cover anything relating to LaRouche.
This emboldened his  followers to escalate their smear campaign with a sixteen-page pamphlet on  Dukakis's alleged mental problems, partiality for the "drug-sex counterculture,"  and support for "privileges for homosexuals."
The initial press run was 100,000  copies, available for fifty cents each in bulk orders of 100 or more.
The press treated the original smear as an isolated incident, but the LaRouche  organization had conducted scores of dirty-tricks operations against the  Democrats (and occasionally against moderate Republicans on behalf of the  Reaganites) over the previous twelve years.
Almost totally ignored by the press  except in the earliest and least harmful stage, this campaign is probably the  largest and certainly the longest-running operation of its type in American  electoral history.
The NCLC's wooing of the Republicans began in 1976, when LaRouche was  running for President on the U.S. Labor Party ticket.
Shortly after Jimmy Carter  won the Democratic nomination, LaRouche shifted from seeking votes for himself  to diverting votes into President Ford's column.
NCLC defectors recall meetings  that summer and fall to plan pro-Ford and anti-Carter activities.
New Solidarity  told the NCLC membership that the nation would face a "near-certain nuclear  incineration" if they didn't launch an all-out "stop Carter" effort.
On election eve  LaRouche appeared on NBC-TV to warn the nation about Carter's alleged mental  imbalance — the same charge as against Dukakis, although less artfully  presented.
The NCLC collected $96,000 on an emergency basis to pay for  LaRouche's half-hour speech.
New Solidarity said the money was raised "with  the aid of a group of conservative Republican businessmen" — a statement which  NCLC defectors say is true.
Federal Election Commission records show large  donations to LaRouche's campaign committee the day before the election.
The  reputed donors were NCLC members covering for the real donors.
One  conservative donor, who was a member of the board of directors of Ocean  Spray, put up $15,000.
After the election, the Republicans joined with the LaRouche organization in  Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York, and Wisconsin to challenge the election returns  in court on grounds of vote fraud.
The objective was to deprive Carter of his edge  in Electoral College votes.
Republican National Committee executive director Ed  Mahe was in contact with the LaRouchians on this and encouraged support for  their effort.
He became involved at the urging of Representative Guy Vander Jagt  (R.-Mich.)
, chairman of the Republican Congressional Committee and a close  friend of President Ford.
A spokesman for Vander Jagt told The Washington Post  that "our Republican interest is similar to theirs on the one issue of voter fraud."
In Oklahoma, a prominent publisher hosted a luncheon for a select group of  Republicans to hear a pitch for money from LaRouche, while the state finance  chairman of the Ford campaign also helped raise funds.
A Denver stockbroker  serving as director of LaRouche's so-called Citizens Committee for a Fair     Election revealed that supporters of Ronald Reagan were also raising money for  the suit.
Conservative journalist Morton Blackwell in The Right Report described  LaRouche's wooing of top Republicans that year as "a surprising success."
LaRouche followers had contacted "literally hundreds of conservatives and  Republicans."
Their approach had been "unfailingly courteous."
One LaRouche  spokesman tried to ingratiate himself with Blackwell by saying, "You're committed  to the ideals which created this country, as we are."
Many Republicans dropped the LaRouchians after major dailies reported on the  curious alliance.
But in some cases, the process simply went underground.
NCLC defectors say that ongoing ties were established with several well-  connected Republicans.
One was Hal Short, a former Republican National  Committee executive who operated as a political consultant in Washington.
Another was Thomas Miner, president of Chicago's Mid-America Committee for  International Business and Government Cooperation, who attempted to arrange  meetings between LaRouche and several of his wealthy friends.
In California, at  least one wealthy Reagan backer became temporarily enchanted with the  LaRouchians.
LaRouche soon recognized that Reagan was the man of the future.
In May 1978  he issued an appeal to Reagan to take the leadership of the party away from  flunkies of the "Judas-goat Kissinger" and to unite the party around an  international strategy of export of "high technology capital goods."
In a February  1979 New Solidarity editorial, LaRouche said that Reagan "is without doubt the  best" among the potential Republican presidential candidates, exhibiting a "moral  quality lacking in all the rest."
George Bush was "totally unacceptable" in the  opinion of LaRouche, who said he was fulfilling a "duty" to the Republican Party  by pointing this out.
By the summer of 1979, LaRouche sensed the impending conservative ground  swell.
"The giant nonliberal sections of the Democratic Party and the GOP are  ready to bolt from the control of their national leaderships," he wrote.
"Any  presidential candidate who links up with this coalition will be 'piggy-backed' into  the White House."
But he expressed concern that Reagan might not move boldly  enough to take advantage of the electorate's mood.
New Solidarity urged  Reagan to keep on a conservative course rather than plunging into the  "mainstream."
The latter strategy, it said, would be "fatal" to his campaign.
Meanwhile LaRouche announced his own candidacy for the Democratic  nomination~to raise high the banner of American "nationalism" within the party  most vulnerable to infiltration.
His pro-Republican friends in the Teamsters Union  encouraged this decision, and a Michigan businessman close to the Teamsters  would end up managing his New Hampshire primary campaign.
Said Rolland  McMaster, a top Michigan Teamster leader: "People like it he's a Democrat now."
The Teamsters were the only major union in 1980 to support Reagan.
Jackie  Presser, the NCLC's most important Teamster ally, was appointed to Reagan's  transition team and inauguration committee.
In the fall of 1979 LaRouche spent most of his time lambasting his liberal  Democratic opponents — Carter, Kennedy, and Jerry Brown.
But as primary day  approached in New Hampshire, a curious shift in emphasis occurred.
LaRouche  focused his fire on Reagan's major rival, George Bush.
A deluge of anti-Bush  propaganda emanated from LaRouche headquarters, focusing on the type of  conspiracy theories that William Loeb's Manchester Union Leader had long  popularized throughout the state.
LaRouche charged that Bush was a tool of the  Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission — a typical  Anglophile one-worlder.
He also alluded to the "bones in Bush's closet," his  membership in Yale University's Skull and Bones society.
Similar charges about Bush came from publisher Loeb, the John Birch Society,  and Reagan's campaign aides.
Reagan himself expressed concern over the  Trilateral Commission's "undue influence" in government and politics, although  not mentioning Bush's name.
But LaRouche spread the message most  vigorously.
He had hundreds of volunteers, millions of dollars, and his own  printing and typesetting companies.
Most important, he had nothing to lose.
No  intemperate or exaggerated statements could hurt him since he already was  branded as an extremist.
It worked.
During the final weeks of the primary campaign.
Bush repeatedly was  asked about the Trilateral Commission, and booed when he attempted to brush  off the questions.
The Wall Street Journal devoted a front-page article to his  Trilateral problem, noting that it had become "a genuine, if unlikely issue."
LaRouche himself received only 2 percent of the vote on primary day, but New  Solidarity suggested that he had helped Reagan to make "Bush's 'blueblood'  connection to the Trilateral Commission ... the key issue in the race."
Supposedly the Reagan campaign and Loeb had borrowed their material from  Citizens for LaRouche, and LaRouche's own attacks on the "silk-stocking crowd"  had "set the tone" for the primary.
This tactic had put Bush "on the defensive."
LaRouche was not so obvious as to eulogize Reagan while harassing Bush.
In  early January he wrote an article describing Reagan as "a man whose career  was originally sponsored by Borax, and who is still selling the stuff."
But he was  confident Reagan would win in November, and fully intended to be on the  winning side.
He urged the Reagan campaign to continue on an aggressively  conservative course.
This could "make political mincemeat of the Carter  administration," he said.
For his own part, no sooner was the New Hampshire  primary over than he shifted his main attack to Carter and spent the rest of the  season pointing out that the President, like Bush, was a Trilateral Commission  alumnus.
The New Hampshire effect was not duplicated, but LaRouche did     exasperate Commission member David Rockefeller.
In a letter to The New York  Times, Rockefeller complained about the outlandish conspiracy theories, citing  specific charges made only by the LaRouchians.
The Times accompanied his  letter with an editorial deploring certain unnamed anti-Trilateralists.
That summer the LaRouchians met a veteran political operative who would  become a mentor of sorts.
Paul Corbin, a longtime Kennedy family retainer who  had served Robert Kennedy as a specialist in sensitive operations, was working  for Teddy Kennedy at the Democratic convention.
LaRouche had long despised  Teddy, entitling one of his political tracts "Beneath the Waters of  Chappaquiddick."
But at the convention LaRouche hoped to put together a  coalition of Kennedy supporters, farm activists, labor leaders, and his own  organization to stop Carter.
Corbin was invited to LaRouche's convention  command post at Regency House to discuss a deal involving delegates.
He was  amused to find that LaRouche had no delegates.
However, he would continue his  contacts with LaRouche's followers.
After Carter was renominated, Corbin  seethed with resentment on behalf of Teddy.
He offered his services to Reagan  campaign manager William Casey, and was hired as an operative to report  directly to Casey, James Baker, and Edwin Meese.
(Corbin says he told Casey:  "I'm not here for pay but I want to stop Carter.
If Carter wins, the next nominee  will be Mondale.")
After linking up with the Reaganites, Corbin developed a  relationship with the LaRouchians that lasted for years, although he never agreed  with their politics.
He attended many of their political events, had dinner with  Lyndon and Helga, became fast friends with LaRouche's top Washington  operative, Richard Cohen, and provided them wilh advice on how to gain  influence within the Democratic Party.
He also chatted frequently on the phone  with Jeffrey Steinberg, the chief of LaRouche's security staff.
In 1983 the press uncovered that William Casey had surreptitiously obtained  copies of President Carter's television debate briefing book prior to the October  1980 debate.
The incident was dubbed "Briefingate."
The Justice Department  launched an investigation and a congressional committee made inquiries.
Casey,  who had become CIA director, revealed that he had received certain Carter  campaign materials, although not the briefing book, from Paul Corbin.
The LaRouchians were anxious to stop the Briefingate probe, and issued a  pamphlet calling it a Communist-liberal plot to undermine Reagan's Strategic  Defense Initiative.
The morning the story about Corbin broke in the media, there  was a lengthy phone conversation between Corbin and Jeff Steinberg, according  to former security staffer Charles Tate, who took the incoming call.
Asked about  this in 1988, Corbin didn't recall the conversation but noted that Steinberg  frequently solicited his opinion on fast-breaking political events.
Corbin denied  having anything to do with snatching Carter's briefing book and said he doubted  the LaRouchians could have gotten close enough to Carter's inner circle to obtain  it.
But he speculated that Republican tricksters might be dealing with the  LaRouchians against Dukakis.
As to his own dealings with the LaRouchians, he     said he had just been keeping an eye on them as a favor to another former  Kennedy aide.
Shortly after the 1980 Democratic convention, LaRouche launched the National  Democratic Policy Committee for long-range organizing and disruption among  Democrats.
Kenneth Dalto, a Detroit LaRouche follower and businessman with  close ties to the Teamsters, was appointed executive director.
NDPC literature  announced that the goal was to organize a LaRouche-led "conservative"  movement within the party, with the aid of the Teamsters and right-wing  construction union leaders.
This faction would seek national "bipartisanship" —  that is.
Democratic capitulation to the Reagan agenda.
That autumn the NDPC  functioned unofficially as a kind of Democrats for Reagan movement attacking  Carter nonstop.
Two days before the general election the NDPC placed an anti-  Carter ad in the Detroit Free Press.
After Reagan's election LaRouche tried to call in his chips.
He went to  Washington with aide Warren Hamerman, who later wrote in EIR that they met  with "numerous officials of the Reagan transition team, a score of congressmen  and senators, and various people with policy influence."
(It was shortly after this  that LaRouche began planning to move his headquarters to the Washington  area.)
In early 1981 the LaRouchians held policy seminars on Capitol Hill and  provided EIR gift subscriptions to cabinet members and leading congressional  figures.
The most important administration contacts were handled by operatives  such as Uwe Parpart and Richard Cohen, who knew how to push the right  buttons and mouth the right slogans.
They became known as strong supporters  of administration policy on defense, the environment, and drugs.
They kept their  mouths shut about the LaRouche organization's peculiar views on the "Zionist-  British organism."
The early stage of the "Reagan Revolution" was an ideal time for the  LaRouchians to make inroads.
Everything was in flux, and their extremism did  not stand out.
They seemed just another part of the mosaic of unorthodox ideas  along with Ayn Rand's capitalist anarchism, Edward Teller's sci-fi weapons  fantasies, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency's plans for  emergency rule drafted by cronies of Edwin Meese.
The LaRouchians crowed  when Reagan stated in his 1981 West Point commencement address: "At Trophy  Point, I'm told there are links of a great chain that was forged and stretched  across the Hudson to prevent the British fleet from penetrating further into the  valley.
Today, you are that chain, holding back an evil force that would extinguish  the light we've been tending for six thousand years. . ." In the heady atmosphere  of the Reagan Revolution's springtime, the LaRouchians could actually convince  themselves this was a coded reference to the six-thousand-year struggle  between "humanists" and British "oligarchs."
EIR obtained interviews in 1981 with many high-level appointees, including  Agriculture Secretary John Block, Defense Under Secretary Richard DeLauer,     Commerce Under Secretary Lionel Olmer, Treasury Under Secretary Norman  Ture, Assistant Attorney General Lowell Jensen, and the chairman of the  President's Council of Economic Advisers, Dr. Murray Weidenbaum.
In addition.
Senator Orrin Hatch (R.-Utah), a friend of the President, and Senator John Tower  (R.-Tex.)
, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, granted  interviews.
LaRouche told The Village Voice in 1987 that all this was his reward  for helping sandbag Bush, but in some cases there is a more pedestrian  explanation.
LaRouche spokesmen took the trouble to testify in favor of a number  of Reagan appointees at Senate confirmation hearings, and then called up for  interviews.
LaRouche himself cadged an invitation to have breakfast with Interior  Secretary James Watt along with several other supporters of Watt's confirmation.
LaRouche hoped for a consultant's post, but Watt recalls feeling "instinctively"  that "something was off."
(Within months.
New Solidarity and Executive  Intelligence Review began to attack Watt as a closet environmentalist.)
The most important LaRouchian inroads were at the National Security Council,  where several LaRouche followers became frequent visitors, functioning almost  as unofficial consultants.
They met numerous times with Richard Morris, right-  hand man to National Security Adviser William Clark.
Other NSC officials who  listened to them included Ray Pollock and Norman Bailey.
(EIR has mentioned  meetings with additional NSC officials, including one visit where Criton Zoakos  transmitted LaRouche's views to a specialist in Soviet affairs.)
Morris met several  times with LaRouche himself, as did Pollock twice and Bailey at least three times.
After leaving the administration in early 1984, Bailey became an economics  adviser to the Reagan-Bush reelection campaign, and traveled out to Leesburg  for dinner and a political discussion with Lyn and Helga.
LaRouchian efforts in Washington were paralleled by a nationwide effort to serve  the Republicans on the local level.
Here the LaRouchians became specialists at  smearing Democrats.
This began well before Reagan's victory, but the first  experiments were not very successful.
When Jane Byrne won the Chicago  Democratic mayoral primary in 1979, the LaRouchians published a scurrilous  pamphlet about her.
The Plot to Steal Chicago.
Hundreds of thousands of free  copies were distributed.
Her Republican opponent repeated some of the charges,  and when asked by reporters for proof, cited the LaRouchian pamphlet.
Later he  felt obliged to issue a sheepish retraction.
The following year the LaRouchians backed conservative Republican candidate  Alfonse D'Amato for the U.S. Senate in New York against Congresswoman  Elizabeth Holtzman.
D'Amato held a joint press conference with LaRouche's  National Anti-Drug Coalition, a group devoted to blaming the drug traffic on the  Jews.
The LaRouchians had attacked Holtzman for her role in founding the  Justice Department's Nazi-hunting unit, the Office of Special Investigations.
The  OSI, the LaRouchians charged, was a Zionist-British plot against America, and  Holtzman was a traitor.
They continued these attacks during the campaign, also  calling Holtzman soft on drugs.
D'Amato failed to publicly disassociate himself     from the LaRouchian rhetoric at the time, although he held no more press  conferences with them.
Incredibly, Holtzman's campaign staff let slip the  opportunity to score a major point with Jewish voters, and D'Amato squeaked  through to a narrow victory in November riding the coattails of the Reagan  landslide.
With the launching of the NDPC, LaRouche had the perfect cover for pro-  Republican smear campaigns: One of his followers would enter the Democratic  primary against the targeted candidate, disseminating the smears from within.
This would soften up the target for the Republican nominee's post-primary  onslaught.
In 1982 the LaRouchians used red-baiting and sexual smears against former  California governor Jerry Brown, who was running for the U.S. Senate.
The  material was issued by NDPC candidate William Wertz's campaign committee.
It  emphasized Brown's ties to Tom Hayden and Jane Fonda, presenting a wildly  exaggerated account of the couple's leftist activities in hopes it would rub off on  Brown.
Fonda engaged in animalistic sexual behavior, one pamphlet said.
Her  movies promoted incest.
Her mother had committed suicide.
Her Malibu home  had been the scene of "wild goings-on" prior to Sharon Tate's murder.
She, her  husband, and Brown were all part of the "Cult of Aquarius" plotting to deprive  America of clean safe nuclear energy.
The pamphlet advertised campaign  bumper stickers: "Clean Up the Fruitflies — Spray Jerry Brown," "Don't Let Jerry  Brown Pull Down Your Pants" and "What Spreads Faster than Radiation?
Jane  Fonda."
The Baltimore LaRouche organization smeared liberal Democratic  congresswoman Barbara Mikulski in the 1982 and 1984 primaries, as noted  earlier, but the softening-up tactic was best seen in 1986, when Mikulski became  the Democratic candidate for the U.S. Senate.
She was opposed by Republican  Linda Chavez, a Social Democrat turned neo-conservative who had served as  the chief of President Reagan's public liaison office.
The Republicans regarded  the race as a crucial one in their battle to keep control of the Senate, and the  LaRouchians obliged by lesbian-baiting Mikulski in the primary.
NDPC candidate,  Debra Freeman, urged Maryland Democrats to "vote straight Democrat."
She  continued this rhetoric beyond the primary season, calling Mikulski a "dike in the  way of progress" and the "ugliest woman in Congress."
New Solidarity quipped  that there should be a prize for anyone "who can correctly identify Mikulski's sex."
Chavez adopted a watered-down version of this, calling her opponent a "San  Francisco-style Democrat" and warning that she could not "hide in the closet."
Supporters also dredged up stories about an alleged affair between Mikulski and  a staff aide.
But many voters apparently were disgusted by the Freeman-Chavez  act: Mikulski won a strong victory in November.
The LaRouchians intervened more successfully in a senatorial race two years  earlier in North Carolina.
It was a contest of national importance, with former     Democratic governor James Hunt attempting to unseat Republican senator  Jesse Helms, one of the most powerful figures on Capitol Hill.
Former NCLC  security staffer Charles Tate says he was told in early 1984 that work would be  done on Helms's behalf.
This was no surprise to Tate: he knew the security staff  had been in touch with a top Helms aide for several years.
(During the Falklands  war in 1 982, Helms had been the only senator to adopt the idea, also held by  LaRouche, that the United States should invoke the Monroe Doctrine against  "British imperialism" and in defense of Argentina's junta.
The NDPC had issued a  pro-Argentina propaganda pamphlet, including statements by LaRouche and  Helms.)
Security staffers discussed sending an infiltrator into the Hunt campaign, but  decided they could do the job best through undercover phone calls.
Tate was  present in the New York security office while a black NCLC member made calls  to gay activists backing Hunt.
The caller claimed to be from the Chicago Metro, a  black weekly.
Given Helms's notorious racism, the persons being interviewed all  assumed the caller was anti-Helms.
Meanwhile articles linking Hunt to the gay community began to appear in The  Landmark, a now-defunct conservative weekly published by Chapel Hill realtor  Robert Windsor.
The Landmark published excerpts from what apparently were  taped conversations with various Hunt supporters in Chapel Hill, New York City,  and elsewhere.
The persons interviewed included gay activists as well as liberal  socialites and civil rights leaders.
The idea was to show that Hunt was getting  substantial local and national support from constituencies disliked by many  conservative Democrats.
There were also articles suggesting Hum was himself  gay.
"Jim Hunt Is Sissy, Prissy, Girlish and Effeminate," read one headline,  followed by "Is Jim Hunt homosexual?
.
.
.
Is he AC and DC?
Has he kept a deep  dark secret in his political closet all of his adult life?"
Hundreds of thousands of  free copies of The Landmark were circulated throughout the state, especially in  rural areas.
Like any wily campaigner.
Helms publicly disassociated himself from  the false charges about Hunt's sex life (and there is no evidence that Helms  personally knew of the LaRouchians' involvement), but The Landmark's press  run increased sharply right before Election Day.
In the wake of Helms's narrow  victory, many North Carolinians believed the smear campaign had tipped the  balance.
At least some of the tapes used by The Landmark came from LaRouche's  security staff.
In early March 1984, a LaRouchian phoned Virginia Apuzzo,  director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, pretending to be a news  reporter.
Charles Tate says he heard the call being made and "saw the tape  recorder running."
A transcript of Apuzzo's remarks appeared in the March 29  issue of The Landmark, which also included excerpts from a phone conversation  with Lightning Brown, a gay activist in Chapel Hill.
Brown says he received two  calls.
The first was from Grant Duay, a supposed reporter for a gay weekly, the  New York City News.
Brown said that Duay "asked about my fund raising for     Hunt.
The details ended up in Tine Landmark riglit away — it was friglitening."
Duay was in fact a notorious LaRouclie operative wlio liad previously used the  New York City News as his cover for interviewing and taping political opponents  of LaRouche.
(In 1986 Duay would be arrested in Manhattan as part of a  homosexual child pornography ring.)
Brown's second call was from the black LaRouchian.
"I told him I felt sorry for the  publisher of The Landmark and that I had prayed for him," said Brown, who is a  Quaker.
"My remark later appeared in The Landmark.
It was supposed to prove I  was a devil worshipper."
Landmark publisher Windsor was in close contact with the LaRouchians  throughout that spring.
He accompanied Tom Allred, Hunt's LaRouchian  opponent in the Democratic primary, on a trip to Raleigh.
"We toured the  legislature and I introduced him to Listen Ramsey, speaker of the house, and  many other people," Windsor wrote in a front-page article about Allred.
In a 1987  phone interview Windsor said he had also attended an NDPC meeting held to  recruit North Carolina conservatives to run on the LaRouche slate, Windsor  claimed that a number of his conservative friends had contributed money to the  NDPC, including one $50,000 contribution.
The LaRouchians' biggest effort ever was against the Democrats' 1984 national  ticket.
What they were planning was suggested by their attitude toward the  party's May 1983 telethon.
They called it a "disgustathon" and a cover for the  laundering of drug money.
New Solidarity gloated that "complaint and insult calls  reportedly outnumbered favorable responses 9 tol ," and that party leaders  believed but could not prove that someone "intentionally jammed their incoming  lines."
(The LaRouchians had scores of WATS line phones in their national and  regional offices and had practiced jamming before.)
That fall they went after Democratic front-runner Walter Mondale with insulting  leaflets and carefully staged disruptions of his campaign appearances and press  conferences.
As against Bush in 1980, they used the Trilateral Commission  issue, publishing a list of Mondale advisers said to be Trilateral members and  citing his own membership as proof that he was a tool of "Kissinger and  Rockefeller."
At the time of the Grenada invasion they charged that Mondale  foreign policy adviser Robert Pastor and former Carter aide Dr. Peter Bourne had  been in cahoots with the ultra-left military regime overthrown by the invasion.
In  fact.
Pastor and Bourne had merely provided advice to Bourne's father, who ran  a medical school on the island, on how to steer safely through a dangerous  situation.
The LaRouchians circulated a pamphlet asserting that Pastor and  Bourne had formerly been associated with the Institute for Policy Studies.
When  Mondale was asked about the Grenada allegations at an Oklahoma press  conference, he complained about the smear campaign.
But he never took any  steps against the LaRouchians, and never raised the issue of their apparent ties  to the Reagan administration.
The heart of the 1984 LaRouche operation was the NDPC candidates'  movement, a spectacular eruption of approximately 2,000 candidates into  Democratic primaries.
This was not part of the normal electoral process within  the party but a deliberate disruption orchestrated from without.
Most of the  candidates had no commitment to the party.
Some were full-time LaRouche  cadre, others were senior citizens only dimly conscious of what they were doing.
At least a few were veteran ultra-conservatives well aware that the point was to  help Reagan.
The rhetoric of their campaigns was anti-Mondale, rarely including  criticism of the Republicans.
They staunchly supported Reagan's key policies  such as Star Wars.
In effect, they were an extension of the Republican  presidential campaign into the ranks of the Democratic Party.
The media as well as the Mondale campaign utterly failed to spot what was  happening.
Instead, they focused on a sideshow — the heckling of Mondale by  conservative student activists who apparently were organized by Reagan  operatives.
No one probed LaRouche's hundred-times-larger operation.
In March 1984 NBC-TV's First Camera aired an expose of LaRouche's ties to the  Reagan administration and especially to the National Security Council, The  report also described the NCLC's anti-Semitism and history of violence~and  LaRouche's discussion of a scheme to kill President Carter.
Afterward,  Democratic National Chairman Charles Manatt appealed to President Reagan to  "repudiate" the LaRouchians and "order officials of his administration to cease all  contacts with these extremists."
White House spokesman Larry Speakes's reply  was that the administration talks to "various people who may have information  that might prove helpful to us. . . .Any American citizen, we'd be glad to talk to."
In other words, there was to be no public repudiation of LaRouche.
Later that  spring, the Reagan campaign made much over the Democrats' failure to  repudiate Jesse Jackson.
Reagan spoke of an "insidious cancer" in the  Democratic Party.
"We have no place for haters in America," he said.
He and  Bush hounded Mondale about Louis Farrakhan even though the Democratic  candidate had repeatedly and unequivocally denounced the Nation of Islam  leader.
But in one sense Mondale merely got what he deserved.
Although he  could have shut up the Republicans by uttering the magic words "LaRouche" and  "Nazi," he was curiously too timid to do it.
LaRouche filed a libel suit against NBC and the Anti-Defamation League  regarding the First Camera report.
At the trial in the fall of 1984, he called former  NSC aide Richard Morris as a witness.
Morris, who had moved to the Interior  Department with Reagan crony Clark, was in effect the administration's voice at  the trial.
He studiously avoided any negative statements about LaRouche and  praised him to the jury by affirming that he had provided "good intelligence" to the  government.
Roy Innis, the head of CORE and one of the Reagan  administration's few black allies, appeared as a LaRouche character witness,  telling the jury he didn't think his friend was at all racist or anti-Semitic.
(Innis was  a veteran at such denials.
Back in 1973, after Uganda dictator Idi Amin called     Hitler a great man, Innis had declined to criticize Amin, saying he had "no records  to prove" that Hitler had ever been an enemy of black people.)
Although Innis's  support for LaRouche was in every respect the equivalent of Jesse Jackson's  involvement with Farrakhan, Reagan praised Innis in a New York Times interview  the following February for supporting the administration's social agenda.
The jury  members in the NBC trial, however, rejected Innis's protestations.
They found the  defendants innocent of libel and awarded NBC $3 million in damages on a  counterclaim against LaRouche.
Although The Washington Post and The New Republic published in-depth probes  that fall and winter of LaRouche's White House ties, he continued to enjoy  immunity from any open administration criticism.
His fundraisers began calling  elderly Reagan supporters all over the country.
Their pitch was: Give us your  life's savings to help President Reagan and keep America strong.
This was how  LaRouche rewarded the Reagan administration for not speaking out against him.
In 1986, as we have seen, the victory of LaRouchian candidates for lieutenant  governor and secretary of state in the Illinois Democratic primaries guaranteed  the reelection of Republican governor Jim Thompson.
This was LaRouche's  greatest service yet for the GOP (although an unplanned one).
When Reagan  went to Chicago to campaign for Thompson, he was asked his opinion on the  LaRouchians.
His reply: "I'm not here to do battle with him [LaRouche]; but I don't  believe I could find myself in agreement with him on just about everything."
In the following months the LaRouchians received amazing vote totals in state  after state.
The Democratic Party leadership tried to explain this away as a fluke  or as a failure of local party officials to exercise proper "vigilance."
But the  Republicans knew better--they adopted LaRouche's enthusiastic support for SDI  as a campaign theme of their own.
Evans and Novak wrote in October 1 986 that  the "unlikely conversion" of SDI from an "outer space fantasy ... to a highly  positive political issue" had given Reagan a "potent last-minute weapon" in the  congressional elections.
They cited race after race in which Republican  candidates were attacking Democratic incumbents for failing to back SDI.
Reagan had served notice, they claimed, that "any Democrat who opposes  strategic defense is fair game."
This was precisely the approach the  LaRouchians earlier had used in hundreds of Democratic primaries.
LaRouche  may not be the intellectual author of SDI, but he can lay claim to being the  founder of SDI politics.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Sixteen   The Art of Scapegoating     In an October 1987 review of Veil, Bob Woodward's Iran-Contra book, LaRouche  held forth on the subject of propaganda.
"There is no morality, no truth," in a  propaganda war, he wrote.
"A choice is made to boost or to discredit this or that  personality, group, issue, or policy, and the mechanics of the psy-ops  [psychological operations] trade go to work without scruple to get the job done."
The statement referred to the CIA and the KGB, but LaRouche might as well  have been talking about the NCLC.
Few organizations have ranged the  ideological map with such adroit inconsistency.
First they attacked the U.S.  government for being soft on communism, next they criticized it for giving aid to  the Nicaraguan Contras.
They praised the NAACP for its support of nuclear  power, but they also met with Ku Klux Klan leaders and bemoaned the decline of  the white race.
When they enjoyed access to the Reagan administration,  LaRouche said Reagan was "touched by greatness."
After the administration cut  them off, LaRouche called Reagan a man of low intelligence, "pussywhipped" by  the First Lady.
The inconsistencies sometimes reflect LaRouche's personal pique.
More often  they arise from his dualistic view of politics — that all groups inevitably split into  factions representing sharply opposed views.
Thus, the LaRouchians condemn  the bad Mafia of drug pushers but praise the good Mafia of redeemable patriotic  labor racketeers.
They rail against the bad Communists who, like Gorbachev,  promote glasnost, but express admiration for the good Communists who adhere  to old-fashioned Stalinist views.
They distinguish between good and bad  Freemasons, good and bad Knights of Malta, good and bad Klansmen, They also  believe that the war of "humanist" vs. "oligarchical" tendencies is within the soul  of individual world leaders, which makes it perfectly logical to praise Reagan one  moment and savage him the next.
Underneath all this, LaRouche continues to pursue his anti-Semitic Grand Design  through front organizations, coalitions with outside groups, election campaigns,  pseudo-academic conferences, and what he calls the "naming of names."
His  propaganda methods are far more complex than those of the Ku Klux Klan and  other extremist groups.
He will start by selecting a legitimate issue such as AIDS,  the farm crisis, or defense spending.
Giving an appearance of sincere concern,  his followers often research the issue thoroughly and come up with proposals  that make sense.
But they always announce that an evil plot is blocking  implementation of their proposals and attempt to steer the campaign in an anti-  Semitic direction.
Sometimes they employ obvious euphemisms — "Zionist,"     "usurer," "shylock," or "cabalist."
Other times, they refer to "monetarists" (as in  moneylender), "Venetian bankers" (as in The Merchant of Venice), or "Our  Crowd" (from the title of Stephen Birmingham's best-selling book about  prominent New York Jews).
They also use esoteric code words like "British,"  "Babylonian," "Whore of Babylon," and "Mesopotamian," which may puzzle the  average person but strike a chord with anti-Semites of the old school.
Another tactic is to highlight well-known Jewish families or individuals.
The  Bronfman family (Seagram's), oil tycoon Armand Hammer, philanthropist Max  Fisher, or investment banker Felix Rohatyn are either blamed for problems with  which they have no connection or assigned a greatly exaggerated responsibility.
If an individual happens to be a mobster or some other reprehensible type, the  LaRouchians will emphasize his misdeeds to the exclusion of those of his Gentile  associates.
(To the LaRouchians, Meyer Lansky i/i/asthe Mafia in his day; the  Sicilians hardly counted.)
LaRouche's publications also strive to hit mainstream  Jews with guilt by association, through the use of semantic tags — e.g., "Lansky's  ADL" and "Lansky's Israel."
The list of those to be attacked includes many non-Jews, such as Senator  Moynihan of New York or former Secretary of State Alexander Haig, But the  attacks usually focus on their support for Israel or their friendship with prominent  Jews, and may allude to real or rumored Jewish ancestry.
In a 1978 piece,  LaRouche called Energy Secretary James R. Schlesinger an "imp of evil," born  Jewish and "a convert to Lutheranism."
While Schlesinger does come from  Jewish ancestry, LaRouche's statement basically reflected a traditional practice  of anti-Semites — call anyone you don't like a Jew.
Slyly, LaRouche added that  Schlesinger's alleged Jewishness was really "irrelevant" since his "morality is  neither Jewish nor Christian."
LaRouche failed to explain why, if it was irrelevant,  he had bothered to mention it.
Through such tricks, LaRouchian propaganda blames the Jews for just about  every problem facing the average American.
The message is carefully tailored for  different constituencies.
Farmers are told that Wall Street "monetarists" are  behind the agricultural crisis and the decline of the family farm.
Teamster union  leaders are told that liberal Jewish foundations are behind the government's  crackdown on union corruption.
The AFL-CIO rank and file is told that its leaders  are Zionist agents who don't really care about bread-and-butter problems.
Black  college students are told that Jews exploit black entertainers and that the Anti-  Defamation League secretly funds the Ku Klux Klan.
The public in general is told  that Jews are inveterate conspirators who planned the slayings of Abraham  Lincoln, John F. Kennedy, and Jimmy Hoffa, and are trying to assassinate  LaRouche.
The LaRouchians weave into these charges a toned-down version of the "blood  libel" — the belief, widely held in medieval Europe, that Jews kidnap Christian  children and use them for ritual sacrifices.
Various wealthy American and Israeli     Jews are accused of pushing drugs to American youtli, sexually molesting them,  or teaching them immorality via rock music and Hollywood movies.
LaRouchian propaganda also tries to raise doubts about the patriotism of  American Jews.
When a Pentagon official, Jonathan Pollard, was arrested as an  Israeli spy in 1986, the LaRouchians portrayed him as typical of Jews in the U.S.  government.
In March 1987, New Solidarity published on its front page a list of  Jews in the Reagan administration, described as agents of a "subversive parallel  government."
These individuals, including Assistant Defense Secretary Richard  Perle and Geneva arms negotiator Max Kampelman, were identified as Jewish  via the label "JINSA operatives" (a reference to the Washington-based Jewish  Institute for National Security Affairs).
An Executive Intelligence Review special  report described them as "not simply 'Zionist Lobby' activists, but hardcore  Mossad operatives."
A LaRouchian editorial urged a general "housecleaning" to  get these associates of the Israeli "mafia" out of the U.S. government "once and  for all."
The loyalty issue has been a standard anti-Semitic tactic ever since the French  army captain Alfred Dreyfus was falsely convicted of treason in 1894.
But the  LaRouchians add another twist (as did Hitler in Mein Kampf, and Stalin in his  polemics against Trotsky), claiming that the Jews are not just spies but political  agents who secretly manipulate policy to weaken the nation's will to resist its  enemies.
LaRouchian publications also depict Israel as providing the Soviet Union with  intelligence culled from a vast network of Zionists in the U.S. government.
It is  said to be the "main intermediary country which Moscow uses in stealing U.S.  sensitive equipment" — the United States gives Israel high-tech weaponry, and  the Israelis pass it on.
Such themes go hand in hand with attempts to trivialize the crimes of the Third  Reich.
In 1978 LaRouche dismissed the Holocaust as mostly "mythical," while his  wife, Helga, called it a "swindle."
New Solidarity attacked the Holocaust  curriculum in New York public schools as "viciously anti-German" and as "filth,"  saying that any teacher who taught it should be fired.
When the television movie  Holocaust was aired in 1979, New Solidarity denounced it.
In the early 1980s,  LaRouchian publications began to defend Nazi war criminals as innocent victims  of persecution.
The Justice Department's investigation of Tscherim Soobzokov, a  former SS officer, was attacked as an "outrageously corrupt, KGB-modeled  witchhunt."
When he was seriously wounded in a 1984 pipe-bomb explosion at  his New Jersey home, local LaRouchians called a press conference and accused  the Anti-Defamation League and the Israeli government of complicity in the  bombing.
They demanded the appointment of a federal special prosecutor.
After  the FBI refused to take their allegations seriously and Soobzokov died from his  injuries.
New Solidarity published a cartoon of an FBI badge dripping with blood.
"Blood on Hands of FBI, ADL," the headline said.
Austrian President Kurt Waldlieim seems to be anotlier innocent victim.
Wlien  tine World Jewisli Congress produced evidence of liis Nazi past in 1986,  Executive Intelligence Review dismissed it as a "gigantic hoax."
World Jewish  Congress chairman Edgar Bronfman, EIR added, is a "Meyer Lansky-linked  organized crime figure."
President Reagan's 1985 trip to the graves of SS officers at Bitburg in West  Germany was no policy blunder in New Solidarity's view, but a "courageous"  action to strengthen the Western alliance.
It gave the German people "a sense of  pride in the historical importance of Germany's contribution to all mankind."
Jewish leaders who opposed the trip, such as Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel,  acted as anti-German "racists" and as dupes of Soviet propaganda.
"There is no  limit," Executive Intelligence Review wrote, "to the psychotic frenzy [Jewish  leaders] can be driven to by guilt and [Soviet] blackmail."
Despite all this, LaRouche and his followers vehemently deny they are anti-  Semitic.
They say that the real anti-Semites are the Zionists, who keep the Jews  in an inward-turned nationalistic frame of mind and use them on behalf of  nefarious oligarchical political purposes.
One of the supposed aims of the  LaRouchians is to liberate the Jews from Zionism so they can lead fuller lives.
Zionism and the Jews are not the LaRouchians' only obsessions.
They agitate  around a variety of issues that appear innocuous and often intriguing: a crash  program for fusion, a manned trip to Mars, new irrigation projects for the Rocky  Mountain states.
Yet there's always a catch to it.
Support for space exploration  becomes a crusade for a trillion-dollar government project necessitating  centralization of the economy — an indirect way of promoting national socialist  economics.
America's law-and-order problems likewise become a pretext for nudging the  public toward accepting police-state methods.
In 1978 LaRouche predicted a  massive surge of domestic terrorism would soon hit America.
The nation's  survival would depend on "surgically precise" action against the controllers of the  plot — e.g. the Zionists.
When the terrorist wave failed to materialize, the  LaRouchians simply linked the idea of extra-constitutional surgery to the drug  problem, urging a mobilization of the armed forces.
In this they followed the basic principle of fascist agitation: Pick a problem that is  real, highly visible, easy to understand, and, above all, charged with emotion,  then offer a simplistic solution.
They are attuned to such issues and the ever-  shifting possibilities for demagoguery because of their constant dialogue with the  public.
LaRouche followers are at the nation's airports every day, all day, talking  politics with quintessential Middle Americans.
Or they are on the phone for long  hours as fundraisers, sounding out the views of potential donors.
As candidates  for public office, they fan out each primary season to working-class  neighborhoods and farm communities across the country, not just to ask for     votes but to engage people in serious discussions.
Illinois pollster Michael  McKeon has watched them at work at shopping centers.
He observes that a  LaRouche campaign worker may experience rejection from nine out of ten  passersby, but the latter will often communicate the reason for their negative  response.
They will suggest new and more relevant issues even while flinging  the leaflet back in the canvasser's face with a curse.
The LaRouchians listen  carefully to angry people and sometimes perceive things about the public's mood  before the pollsters and professional politicians do.
The best example is the AIDS issue.
By the fall of 1985, LaRouche recognized  that it was about to become the scariest issue of the decade.
He concocted the  slogan "Spread Panic, not AIDS!"
The entire human race, he claimed, would face  extinction if stern measures weren't taken immediately against gay people and  mosquitoes.
Offering himself as the only leader willing to act with the necessary  ruthlessness, he picked California as his first battleground.
In the summer of  1986 his followers fanned out through most of the state's fifty-eight counties.
Operating through a committee called PANIC, they collected over 700,000  signatures for a ballot initiative calling for quarantine of AIDS victims.
The  signatures withstood all legal challenges, and the measure was placed on the  ballot as Proposition 64.
It received nationwide publicity and became a major  issue in California politics.
Congressman William Dannemeyer (R.-Cal.)
championed it and became its respectable front man.
Ironically, Dannemeyer had  chaired the Republican Study Committee two years earlier when it produced a  report warning conservatives not to be taken in by LaRouche propaganda and  pointing out that LaRouche's intent was to "disrupt our democratic system."
Dannemeyer now said, as did some other California conservatives, that he was  supporting Proposition 64 solely on its merits.
Gay organizations, the health  professions, labor unions, and the Democratic Party launched a counter-effort,  warning the public that "political extremist Lyndon LaRouche" was behind the  measure.
(One of the anti-Proposition 64 groups was even called "Stop  LaRouche.")
Gay organizations charged that when LaRouche said quarantine he  really meant concentration camps.
LaRouche's cadres were preprogrammed for the quarantine campaign.
For years  words like "faggot" and "queer" had peppered NCLC publications, along with  allegations that child molesters, Satanists, and Communists control the gay rights  movement.
The articles also suggested that homosexuality is a characteristically  Jewish condition and that rich Jews encourage it to undermine Western  civilization.
When the AIDS crisis erupted, LaRouche blamed the "shylocks" for  being too cheap to pay for research crash programs.
His gay-equals-Jewish canard dates back to the 1970s, when New Solidarity  raved against the "faggot politics" of "Zionist-supporting" gay activists.
New  Solidarity published a cartoon series in which prominent New York Jews were  shown in Roman togas at a banquet sponsored by the "Emperor of Homohattan,"  Mayor Ed Koch.
In the early 1980s LaRouchian publications accused prominent     Jews and pro-Zionist Gentiles of being part of an international "Homintern."
LaRouche wrote "Kissinger: The Politics of Faggotry," a crude and defamatory  leaflet on his longtime Symbolic Jew.
According to LaRouche, Kissinger's alleged  "heathen sexual inclinations are merely an integral part of a larger evil," and  Kissinger is "psychologically" part of a "distinct species."
In the context of  LaRouche's biological-racial theories about the Jewish "species," the equation of  Jewishness and "faggotry" was unmistakable.
LaRouche also taught that the alleged pathology of the Jewish family, especially  the mother's possessiveness, produces psychosexual aberrations in young Jews.
A 1986 New Solidarity item, "Jewish Mothers in the Age of Aquarius," joked that  homosexuality is the natural result.
That the Jewish oligarchy deliberately promotes homosexuality is suggested by  LaRouche's references to "sodomic," "pederastic," and "lesbian" practices within  oligarchy-controlled "cults" such as Freemasonry and the Quakers.
In a  November 1985 speech, he said AIDS was a "man-made evil" linked to these  "cults out of Babylon."
He further developed this theme in "The End of the Age of  Aquarius?
," a rambling discourse on AIDS that included attacks on the  "Babylonians," the "British," "usurers," and "cabalists."
His conclusion;  "Homosexuality was organized in the United States.
It wasn't something that  sprang from the weeds. . . .It was organized. . ."   In an article on government monetary policy, LaRouche claimed that the money  for the necessary public health measures against AIDS could only come from  funds currently being used to service the international debt.
But the "shylocks"  were blocking this: "Shylock demands his pound of flesh, and cares not in the  least whether the collection kills the debtor."
The implication was that anyone  who opposed Proposition 64 was probably acting on behalf of powerful Jews.
LaRouche lashed out at "Meyer Lansky's" Hollywood and a New Solidarity  columnist joked that the Anti-Defamation League had launched a stop-LaRouche  committee called "AiDsL."
LaRouche's AIDS propaganda bears a striking resemblance to Hitler's on syphilis  as set forth in Mein Kampf.
Syphilis, like AIDS, is sexually transmitted, and in the  1920s there was no cure.
Hitler focused on it because of his obsession with  racial purity and his fear that the Aryan bloodline was being contaminated.
Just  as he blamed the spread of syphilis on its victims, especially prostitutes, so  LaRouche blames gays for spreading AIDS.
Hitler believed that sexual  promiscuity and prostitution were the result of "Jewification of our spiritual life and  mammonization of our mating instinct" and thus called syphilis the "Jewish  disease."
LaRouche refers to AIDS as the "Babylonian disease."
Hitler's answer to syphilis was to call for a quarantine of prostitutes and other  infected persons.
"There must be no half measures; the gravest and most  ruthless decisions will have to be made.
It is a half measure to let incurably sick     people steadily contaminate the remaining healthy ones. . . .[I]f necessary, the  incurably sick will be pitilessly segregated — a barbaric measure for the  unfortunate who is struck by it but a blessing for his fellow man and posterity."
LaRouche, in "The End of the Age of Aquarius?"
, urges much the same solution  for AIDS: "We've got to contain it, we can't find a miracle cure that fast; we're  going to have to use methods of public health, which means we're going to have  to put away every carrier until they can no longer carry."
The parallels continue.
Hitler said regarding syphilis victims that there "is no  freedom to sin at the cost of posterity."
LaRouche says it's "nonsense" to be  concerned about the "civil rights" of AIDS victims.
Hitler criticized the authorities  for not "summon[ing] up the energy to take decisive measures" and for their  attitude of "total capitulation."
LaRouche says the U.S. government is afraid to  "estrange the votes of a bunch of faggots and cocaine sniffers."
Hitler said that  for people who refuse to fight to save their own health, "the right to live in this  world of struggle ends."
LaRouche says that unless the American people change  their attitude toward AIDS and their "moral direction," they will "no longer [be] fit  to survive morally, and will not survive."
Mein Kampf and "The End of the Age of Aquarius?"
both express a concern for  public health and describe quarantine as necessary in order to save lives.
Yet  Hitler clearly stated that his syphilis-fighting program masked a higher goal: The  Nazi Party leadership, he said, must "succeed in representing to the people the  partial goal which now has to be achieved, or rather conquered, as the one which  is solely and alone worthy of attention, on whose conquest everything depends.
The great mass of people cannot see the whole road ahead of them without  growing weary and despairing of the task."
LaRouche is equally candid, linking  the struggle for an AIDS quarantine with the need for a new ideological  "paradigm" in America.
New Solidarity even suggests that AIDS might become  the springboard for a nationalist revolution.
What America could expect in the wake of such a revolution is revealed in NDPC  propaganda urging a roundup of prostitutes, gays, drug users — anyone who  might have been exposed to the AIDS virus — and their incarceration in "special  isolation hospitals, under prison guard if necessary."
LaRouche's "Aquarius"  article also discusses the possible need to "hang" or "burn" those responsible for  spreading AIDS.
Given the virtual equation of Jews and gays.
Proposition 64  becomes simply an extension of earlier LaRouchian calls for an anti-Zionist  Special Prosecutor's Office and for the "immediate elimination" of Zionists from  American public life.
When two-thirds of California's voters rejected Proposition 64 in November 1986,  the media depicted this as a defeat for LaRouche.
Yet it actually was a  LaRouche victory of sorts.
His measure received over two million votes in the  teeth of an opposition that outspent the LaRouchians ten to one.
In some rural  counties it received the support of over 40 percent of the voters.
Apart from these     election statistics, LaRouclie scored a major ideological breakthrough for neo-  Nazism in America.
He took a previously taboo idea — enforced isolation for the  Scapegoat — and elevated it into a topic of legitimate discourse.
He did this by  reframing the discourse in pseudo-medical terms and targeting a minority less  well organized than the Jews.
Proposition 64's opponents, frightened by its  implications but lacking a full understanding of LaRouche's ideology or of fascism  in general, were maneuvered into appearing on talk shows with the  LaRouchians, thus lending an aura of legitimacy to their extremist ideas.
As the campaign intensified, some opponents of Proposition 64 developed a  strategy to cut through the smoke screen and expose the hidden political  agenda.
Howard Wallace, the coordinator of the San Francisco Labor Council's  work against Proposition 64, stated in the SFLC newsletter: "The real purpose of  this initiative has little to do with either AIDS or public health. . . .[The  LaRouchian] purpose is to build their small corps of storm troopers into a larger  one.... In the grand tradition of Hitler's Nazis, they're taking the path of least  resistance: attacking those who suffer in some measure from social stigma. . ."  But too much of the literature opposing Proposition 64 continued to be confused,  jumbling together the political and pseudo-medical issues and dismissing the  LaRouchians as kooks or cultists.
In the following year the quarantine idea became "respectable" nationally.
Congressman Dannemeyer appeared on TV talk shows to discuss it as just one  more proposal in the marketplace of ideas.
Several other prominent New Right  politicians expressed interest in the concept.
In mid-1987 President Reagan's  domestic policy adviser, Gary Bauer, when questioned about it, coolly  commented: "I don't see any evidence at this pointXhaX a quarantine in the  traditional sense would be particularly eiiecWve" (italics added).
Thus does  LaRouchian propaganda spread like ripples in a pond.
LaRouche meanwhile developed a more extreme solution for AIDS.
Praising  Western Europe's skinheads for beating up gays, he said they spontaneously  expressed the "conspiratorial and other ethical characteristics" of a nationalist  revolution.
He suggested that lynching might be the next step — in Catholic  countries they'd pick off the gays one by one, while in Protestant countries  lynching would become a mass movement.
The lynchers, LaRouche said, would  perhaps be remembered as the "only political force which acted to save the  human species from extinction."
From this, he passed over to the concept of an anti-gay Holocaust, stopping just  short of advocacy.
"The only solution" to AIDS, he said, "is either public health  measures including isolation as necessary, or 'accelerated deaths' of carriers."
He added: "The point of no return ... is coming up very fast.
If the violence  comes, the politicians, the courts, and the governments will have no one to  blame but themselves.
They left a desperate, terrified population no other  choice."
Meanwhile, public concern over AIDS reached a high pitch.
An American Medical  Association poll found that 50 percent of the American public believed all  necessary measures should be taken to stop AIDS "even if it means some  people might have their rights violated."
LaRouche continued his inflammatory  propaganda, claiming that AIDS was spread by casual contact and that the  majority of heterosexual Americans would soon be infected if his draconian  measures were not adopted.
His followers were on the phones at their telephone  boiler rooms in Leesburg, Virginia, night and day, calling thousands of Americans  to warn them of impending disaster and to solicit funds to pay for more  propaganda.
In California, LaRouche's PANIC committee, undeterred by  Proposition 64's defeat, easily collected over 700,000 signatures to place a  second initiative on the ballot, this time in the presidential primary election.
LaRouche purchased a half hour on network television to present his views on  AIDS three days before the primary.
The initiative again failed to pass but  received over 1 ,700,000 votes.
While this represented less votes than the first time (because of a lower voter  turnout), the percentage of supporters had risen from 29 percent to 32 percent.
(In November 1988 a third AIDS crackdown measure appeared on the ballot, this  one sponsored by Congressman Dannemeyer and other conservatives without  LaRouche's direct involvement.
Although polls in September indicated that it had  majority support, it failed to pass.)
LaRouche had demonstrated the vulnerability of the public, when frightened and  angry, to the lure of thinly veiled fascist measures.
He had desensitized millions  to the idea of rounding up unpopular minorities.
His California ballot initiatives  had revealed that many Americans with healthy biological immune systems have  no political immune systems at all.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Seventeen  Get Kissinger!
On February 7, 1982, two LaRouchians met the Devil, not in a graveyard at  midniglit, but in tine well-lit terminal at Newark International Airport.
They  abandoned their literature table and rushed to exorcise him with a barrage of  hostile questions.
"Jesus Christ," muttered Dr. Henry Kissinger, their longtime  hate figure.
He and his wife, Nancy, kept walking toward the boarding area, en  route to Boston, where he was scheduled to undergo triple-bypass heart surgery.
"Dr. Kissinger," shouted twenty-eight-year-old Ellen Kaplan, "is it true that you  sleep with young boys at the Carlyle Hotel?"
It was a standard LaRouchian  accusation.
Nancy Kissinger would have ignored it on other occasions, but she  was distraught by the prospect of her husband's operation.
According to her  attorney, her hand reached out and came in contact, very lightly, with Kaplan's  throat.
Others assert that her actions were less restrained.
Whatever the truth,  Kaplan retreated, and the Kissingers continued on their way.
A trivial event, one might say.
Yet its consequences included a warrant for Mrs.  Kissinger's arrest, a heavily publicized assault trial, and a LaRouchian  harassment campaign against Dr. Kissinger on four continents.
This campaign,  waged from mid-1982 through late 1984, is unique in the annals of radical protest  against public figures.
It involved a torrent of propaganda attacks in at least six  languages, carefully planned disruptions of Kissinger's public appearances, the  planting of defamatory rumors in the international press, scores of malicious  pranks, and the expenditure of millions of dollars on network television ads  denouncing him.
Some observers have viewed LaRouche's anti-Kissinger campaign merely as an  example of irrationalism and cultism — the expenditure of enormous resources on  an effort better suited to an insane asylum.
Yet there were coolheaded pragmatic  reasons for it.
LaRouche had gained a measure of credibility with the Reagan  administration over the previous year.
He had to disguise his anti-Semitism  better.
LaRouche's solution was to select a Symbolic Jew.
Kissinger, with his thick  Central European accent, "Semitic" features, rationalistic worldview, and  reputation for secretive highest-level intrigue, was the perfect choice.
The fact  that he was Jewish was almost universally known — indeed, he was probably the  most famous Jew in the world.
What's more, he was a controversial one, disliked  by many conservatives and by almost all leftists.
Even many moderates had  questions about his record as secretary of state.
A campaign against him, no     matter how nasty, could gain an unspoken sympathy across the political  spectrum.
Building on this dislike of Kissinger, the LaRouchians could turn it into  a dislike of his alleged archetypal qualities.
The LaRouchians had attacked Kissinger on an overtly anti-Semitic basis  throughout the late 1970s.
When New Solidarity called for the "immediate  elimination" of the "Jewish Lobby" from American public life, it said the first stage  should be "the naming of names, such as Henry A. Kissinger."
A subsequent  editorial railed against infiltration of Washington by agents of the "Zionist-British  organism."
Heading the list was the "Israeli-British" agent Kissinger.
When  Kissinger's The White House Years \Nas published in 1980, a review by  LaRouche in EIR used Mein Kampf-s\y\e images of infection and contamination.
America's moral "rot," he said, was due to "such alien 'Typhoid Marys' of  immorality" as Kissinger.
LaRouche then dashed off The Pestilence of Usury, a  pamphlet sold at airport literature tables.
Among the villains was Kissinger, said  to be the servant of oligarchs "far worse than Hitler . . . nasty, evil."
America's traditional neo-Nazis and white supremacists recognized what  LaRouche was doing.
The Christian Defense League, a hate group based in  Louisiana, developed its own line of anti-Kissinger pamphlets mimicking  LaRouche's rhetoric.
Robert Miles, the premier theoretician of the Aryan  Nation/Identity crowd, stated in a 1984 article: "We agree with LaRouche on . . .  his efforts to dislodge the Kissingerites from positions of influence."
Miles also  praised LaRouche for "exposing the neo-atheist materialism of Kissinger to the  dismay of the Talmudists."
LaRouche once again reframed reality so that his Jewish followers could tell  themselves that the anti-Kissinger campaign was "anti-Nazi," He called it  Operation Nuremberg, an effort to punish Kissinger for alleged crimes a "hundred  times worse than Hitler's."
The government would never punish Kissinger; only  the NCLC could do it.
The NCLC might lack the power to exact the ultimate  penalty, but it could psychologically torment Kissinger.
LaRouche used his  vaunted profiling technique to determine what Kissinger supposedly feared the  most: ridicule.
The NCLC set out to confront him with it, much like the  interrogator in Nineteen Eighty-four \Nho confronted Winston Smith with rats.
LaRouche called this "psychological terror."
He framed his plan in such a way that no matter what happened, he would look  all-powerful to his followers.
If Kissinger expressed anger, this would be proof  that LaRouche had freaked him out.
If he ignored LaRouche, this would be proof  that LaRouche had frightened him into silence.
In either case LaRouche could  claim that the trauma was festering and that Kissinger would sooner or later  commit suicide or die of a heart attack.
After the Newark Airport tussle the LaRouchians dispatched Ellen Kaplan to  criminal court to swear out an assault complaint.
This tactic had gained them     media attention on earlier occasions, as wlien FEF members filed assault  charges against Peter Fonda after he ripped up their poster at Denver  International Airport calling for feeding his sister Jane to the whales.
The New  York Post's gossip page took note of Kaplan's assault complaint, but the story  would have stopped there except for a simple mishap: The summons was  delivered to the Kissingers' Washington home at a time when it was closed up.
Mrs. Kissinger did not receive it in time to file an answer before a routine warrant  for her arrest was issued.
The LaRouchians were ecstatic.
They called a press conference in Manhattan.
Kaplan briefly recounted her story, and then NCLC regional director Dennis  Speed outlined the plan to psychologically harass Kissinger through ridicule.
In  an ideal world the press would have walked out at this point.
Instead, Kaplan and  Speed's remarks — including the canard about the Carlyle Hotel — were given  national coverage.
On May 21 , Mrs. Kissinger's attorney moved for dismissal in New Jersey State  Superior Court, arguing the case was "too trivial" for trial.
The judge denied the  motion and set a trial date.
An editorial in the New York Daily News asked why  the courts should be party to schemes that merely "add injury to the original  insult."
When the non-jury trial convened on June 1 0, the media turned out in force.
Kaplan took the stand and delivered a litany apparently designed for maximum  quotability: Mrs. Kissinger "took her left hand and grabbed my neck.
I was very  scared.
She sneered, bared her teeth, and I thought she was going to bite...."  Municipal judge Julio Fuentes found Mrs. Kissinger not guilty.
Sometimes, he  observed, it is "spontaneous and somewhat human" to assault someone.
Although press columnists denounced Kaplan as "swinish," "lowest," and  "filthiest," LaRouche must have felt satisfied.
First, he had escaped denunciation  himself — most news accounts didn't even mention that Kaplan was connected to  him.
Second, the public had been exposed to a baseless charge against  Kissinger, and it was inevitable the accusation would stick in many people's  minds, in that twilight zone where people half believe something because they  want to believe it, (Former NCLC security staffer Charles Tate says the Carlyle  Hotel story came from a "demented" source who also purveyed hysterical rumors  of nationwide homicidal conspiracies.)
The chief significance of the incident was on the level of archetypes: LaRouche  had presented the media with a subliminal version of the medieval Christian  blood libel — the belief that Jews kidnap and sacrifice Gentile children.
In his  Newark version, ritual sacrifice was replaced by the contemporary crime of  sexual abuse.
It was the perfect opener for Operation Nuremberg.
In the summer  of 1982, the LaRouchians announced the next step — an international campaign  to draw the noose of psychological terror around the neck of "Fat Henry."
What followed was a multileveled effort by hundreds of LaRouche's followers.
Most important was the planting of defamatory stories about Kissinger with  overseas newspapers.
This was easiest to achieve in Mediterranean and Third  World countries where conspiracy theories are a basic part of the political culture,  many intellectuals are anti-American and anti-Israel, and Communists and ultra-  rightists subsidize mass circulation dailies.
LaRouche's intelligence staff  concocted different stories for different audiences.
Always there was a plot, and  always it reflected anti-Semitic stereotypes.
Kissinger and his friends were  portrayed as plotting the assassination of prominent Gentiles, collecting usurious  debts for the International Monetary Fund, engaging in real estate swindles,  betraying America to its enemies, and encouraging moral degeneracy on behalf  of a cosmopolitan value system.
The supporting cast included, in one version or  another, the CIA, the KGB, Mossad, the Mafia, the Freemasons, and a powerful  homosexual cabal.
The LaRouchians held press conferences in various world capitals to release  official-looking reports on behalf of Lyndon LaRouche, representing him as a  leader of the U.S. Democratic Party, international publishing tycoon, friend of  Giscard d'Estaing and Helmut Schmidt, and economist of world renown.
Reporters for sensation-mongering newspapers often failed to check whether  LaRouche's credentials were really what his followers claimed.
LaRouche's European Labor Party (ELP) presented a legal brief to the Italian  government tribunal investigating the Red Brigade's kidnapping and murder of  former Prime Minister Aldo Moro.
The brief said Kissinger was behind not only  the Moro murder but a wide range of terrorist acts — a "strategy of tension"  designed to prevent Italian Communist Party participation in the government, A  former Moro aide then told the tribunal about a 1974 conversation in which  Kissinger, who was secretary of state at the time, told Moro that the U.S,  government disapproved of his plan to bring the Communist Party into the  government.
The LaRouchians said this proved their case.
The fact that Moro  was kidnapped in 1978, when Kissinger was no longer secretary of state, didn't  faze them at all.
This story obviously was aimed at the left, but the ELP also developed a version  for the right: Kissinger was a member of the "Homintern," a secret gay  brotherhood operating at the "highest levels of several governments."
The KGB  had learned about this and had blackmailed him into becoming their agent.
Just  why a KGB agent would have wanted to murder Aldo Moro and keep the  Communists out of the Italian cabinet was not explained.
The LaRouchians  boasted that story number one (Kissinger/CIA) was picked up by Moscow's  Literaturnaya Gazeta, while story number two (Kissinger/KGB) was supposedly  reported in Italian, French, and Tunisian newspapers and on Venezuelan  television.
The 1 981 attempted assassination of Pope Jolin Paul was also grist for the mill.
To blame Kissinger fit right in with LaRouche's theory that the Jews controlled  Europe in the Middle Ages through selective poisoning of popes.
The  LaRouchians also enticed the Arab media with a story that Kissinger had formed  a real estate consortium to buy up the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
In mid-1982 the LaRouchians learned that Kissinger was planning a trip to  Argentina, which was in political turmoil following the Falklands fiasco.
A press  statement was sent to Buenos Aires from the office of "U.S. Democratic Party  leader" LaRouche reminding Argentinians that Kissinger had supported the  British.
The statement also accused Kissinger of murdering Aldo Moro,  attempting to murder Helga LaRouche and braining a Rumanian waiter with a  whiskey bottle during a sex orgy in Acapulco.
EIR later claimed that the LaRouche statement was distributed by TELAM, the  Argentine government press agency, and was printed under banner headlines in  a Buenos Aires daily.
A follow-up news release said that Kissinger intended to  put the squeeze on Argentina for the usurers of the International Monetary Fund  and would destroy any politician who opposed him.
According to EIR, this  release also was distributed by TELAM and printed in at least two Argentine  newspapers.
LaRouche's Mexican Labor Party joined the act with a  demonstration at a Chase Manhattan branch in Mexico City to protest an  upcoming Kissinger visit.
Kissinger's name was again linked to IMF usury and  threats to national sovereignty.
In late 1982 the LaRouchians set up a "special-operations 'Kissinger watch'" in  Wiesbaden.
This coincided with the arrival in Europe of LaRouche security aide  Paul Goldstein (who according to FBI claims was hiding from a Manhattan grand  jury investigating the NCLC's harassment of Roy Cohn).
EIR boasted that the  Kissinger Watch had "tracking capabilities extending from Ireland through the  Middle East."
In fact, security staffers merely called up Kissinger Associates in  New York, posing as journalists, to obtain Kissinger's travel schedule.
The objective was to create a "controlled aversive environment" around  Kissinger — schoolboy pranks, crank calls, demonstrations.
When he was about  to leave Munich for London to meet with British officials, an imposter called  Britain to say Kissinger wasn't coming, then called Kissinger's hotel room to say  the British had canceled.
When he visited Milan, the LaRouchians released a  banner supported by hundreds of balloons proclaiming that "Kissinger Killed  Moro."
When he traveled to Stockholm, Swedish ELP members disrupted his  press conference and had to be removed by the police.
New Solidarity boasted  that this took place "under cascades of flashbulbs and television cameras," and  that the story "reached as far as Singapore and Mexico via satellite hook-ups."
When Kissinger gave a speech in Worms on German-American Friendship Day,  an ELP leaflet urged the audience to buy Seymour Hersh's biography of     Kissinger, The Price of Power.
According to El R, a prankster dressed as  Kissinger jumped up as tine event began and sliouted: "Tliat man on tine podium  is not tine real Dr. Kissinger.
I am the real Dr. Kissinger.
I will now tell you the  truth about Aldo Moro. . ." EIR said that as the prankster was being carried out, a  second one, dressed as Nancy Kissinger, jumped up to continue the disruption.
The campaign was no less intense in the United States.
When Kissinger  appeared on ABC-TV's Nightline in August 1982, the LaRouchians mobilized at  the studio in Manhattan.
Covering both exits, they pelted his limousine with eggs,  forcing him to make his escape hidden in a catering truck.
When he spoke at  Georgetown University, they passed out copies of EIR containing an article  entitled "How Henry Kissinger Will Be Destroyed."
When his friends gave him a  birthday party, the LaRouchians passed out a fake "medical alert bulletin"  alleging that he had AIDS (again, the Mein KampfXheme: contamination).
When  he addressed the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith, picketers carried signs  such as "It's Anti-Semitic to Call Kissinger a Jew."
LaRouche meanwhile issued a personal attack in Kissinger.
Circulated in leaflet  form under the title "The Politics of Faggotry," it was a kind of manifesto of the  harassment campaign, uniting LaRouche's loathing of Kissinger, Roy Cohn,  gays, discotheque music, and the Roman Empire into a single extraordinary  vision.
To understand Kissinger's evil species-nature, LaRouche said, one must  "think back to the Emperor Nero and his court.
Think of Studio 54, then of Nero's  court, and then of Studio 54 again.
Think of Roy Cohn's parties . . . Think of  Nero, and then of Kissinger, and then of Nero and then of Roy M. Cohn.
That is  the kind of faggot Henry Kissinger is."
(Questioned about this quote in a 1984  deposition, LaRouche knew he was on shaky ground.
He backed down and said  Kissinger merely had the "personality of a faggot.")
LaRouche noted the tug-of-war in Washington between hard-liners on the White  House staff and State Department moderates.
He reasoned that given the  bumbling moves of the hard-liners in foreign affairs, it was only a matter of time  before the moderates, whose ranks included some former Kissinger proteges,  would begin to exert a preponderant influence.
By portraying this process as a  Kissinger-backed conspiracy, LaRouche could inject his brand of anti-Semitism  into the New Right.
A 1983 EIR special report accused Kissinger of "coordinating a drive to  consolidate control of the Reagan administration for the Trilateral Commission  wing of the Republican Party."
When Reagan appointed Kissinger to head the  White House Commission on Central America, New Solidarity claimed that "a  wave of fear and foreboding is now sweeping through the United States."
An  accompanying article alleged "intense resistance among Reagan Kitchen  Cabinet insiders to Kissinger involvement in administration policy making."
(The  LaRouchians were in contact at the time with Judge William Clark's assistant,  Richard Morris.)
But Kissinger was said to hold all the aces.
He had supposedly     obtained, via tine "Israeli mafia," blackmail videotapes of top administration  officials in bed with Alfred Bloomingdale's mistress, Vicky Morgan.
At this point  the LaRouchians downplayed the theme of Kissinger the "British" agent, which  always had been too esoteric for most Americans.
Now the Symbolic Jew was  given a guise the New Right could easily comprehend: a good old-fashioned  Commie traitor like the Rosenbergs.
New Solidarity announced that Kissinger,  although still linked to the British, was also a "secure and long-term asset of the  Soviet KGB."
This charge was soon extended to other Jews in the U.S.  government and to many Israeli leaders.
In 1984, LaRouche adopted the campaign slogan "Vote for the man that  Kissinger hates the most."
This was a variation on the 1980 campaign theme that  LaRouche was the man the Zionists hated the most.
LaRouche purchased fifteen  half-hour spots on national television, incessantly attacking Kissinger as a traitor.
Under federal law the networks had to sell LaRouche the time and could not  censor his remarks, for he was a registered candidate.
EIR boasted that  LaRouche's television chats reached "up to 15 million people."
When he referred  to "Kissinger and his friends" and "Kissinger and people like him," the real  meaning was obvious to many viewers.
A LaRouchian internal briefing of March 7, 1984, reporting on the organization's  daily round of telephone calls, alleged that the anti-Kissinger campaign was  making headway in important circles.
"Republican and military layers in the south  and mid-Atlantic states are queasy about Kissinger," the memo said.
It cited a  "high level military contact who is a former astronaut."
This individual supposedly  hated Kissinger and believed "the Administration has been going 'downhill' ever  since the removal of Clark from the NSC.
He wants all our material on Kissinger."
(It should be noted that internal briefings routinely exaggerated the NCLC's  influence: High-level officials described as enthusiastic allies were sometimes  just listening to them out of curiosity.)
The LaRouchian hysteria about Kissinger resulted in a strong indirect warning to  the former Secretary of State in July 1982.
An EIR news brief quoted a prediction  by an unnamed psychic that if any attempt should be made on the life of  LaRouche, "a list of 13 well-known political figures, headed by Henry Kissinger,  Nancy Kissinger, and Alexander Haig will meet sudden death by either massive  heart attacks or strokes."
Death fantasies about the Symbolic Jew thereafter  became commonplace in LaRouchian publications.
When Hersh's The Price of  Poi/i/erwas published.
New Solidarity reported that Kissinger was on the verge of  a "potentially fatal coronary."
EIR boasted that, as a result of Operation  Nuremberg, Kissinger had become a "cardio-vascular risk" and might "choose [a]  coward's way out" (i.e., suicide).
When Hungarian-Jewish writer Arthur Koestler  (the author of Darkness at Noon) committed suicide along with his wife in 1983,  New Solidarity suggested various ways in which Henry and Nancy Kissinger and  Federal Reserve Board chairman Paul Volcker (the arch-usurer, in LaRouche's  eyes) could follow the Koestlers' example.
In what could be read as an allusion to     the Holocaust, the article asked: "Why should the worthwhile vast majority of the  human race settle for attempts to solve its antisocial problems on a case-by-case  basis?
Why not get organized to settle with such characters all at once?"
The LaRouchians privately discussed various extreme measures.
Former  LaRouche bodyguard Lee Pick told NBC Nightly News that Paul Goldstein had  asked him to put a bomb under Kissinger's car.
Charles Tate recalls a security  staff meeting on the lawn of LaRouche's Loudoun County mansion at which  members were told Kissinger must die.
But this rage ultimately was just  sublimated into more nasty leaflets and EIR articles.
The LaRouchians had come  to believe that really clever conspirators never carry out an assassination  themselves, but simply spread hate propaganda about the targeted person which  might trigger an attack by some disturbed personality or fanatic.
That way, they  can never be held legally responsible.
As a result of the menacing rhetoric, Kissinger wrote PBI director William  Webster for advice in 1982.
He was careful to emphasize that he was not asking  the PBI "to interfere in any manner with LaRouche's Pirst Amendment rights."
When the harassment escalated, Kissinger sent a second letter.
The PBI  checked to see if there were grounds for prosecution under the federal statute  pertaining to interstate obscene or harassing phone calls.
There weren't.
When the LaRouchians obtained copies of this correspondence under the  Preedom of Information Act, they immediately released it to the press in an effort  to embarrass Kissinger.
Jack Anderson, in an archly written 1985 column on the  POIA documents, made no moral distinction between victim and victimizer.
He  referred to a "decade-long feud" between Kissinger and LaRouche, as if  Kissinger had been partly responsible.
In 1987, James Ridgeway of The Village  Voice rehashed this story, also affecting neutrality: LaRouche had harassed  Kissinger, but Kissinger had an "animus" against LaRouche, Ridgeway said.
The  Voice illustrated Ridgeway's column with pictures of Kissinger, LaRouche, and  Webster with the caption "The Three Paces of Evil."
This type of press coverage  encouraged the LaRouchians, when they came under federal indictment, to use  the Kissinger-Webster letters as proof that the PBI and the prosecutors were  motivated by a vendetta.
The press was not alone in displaying a curious blindness to the true nature of  the anti-Kissinger campaign.
None of the major Jewish organizations spoke out,  even in the face of blatantly anti-Semitic LaRouchian headlines such as  "Kissinger Mafia Pollute the Holy Land."
The Reagan administration also said  nothing.
Indeed, many administration officials continued to meet with the  LaRouchians at the height of the anti-Kissinger campaign, all but egging them  on.
Kissinger was well aware of this.
In a 1984 interview he called the  administration's dealings with LaRouche "outrageous, stupid, and nearly  unforgivable."
LaRouche's rhetoric against Kissinger sometimes became so wild tliat it ceased  to be effective propaganda.
But LaRouclie was playing not just to the general  public and Washington conservatives, but also to his own followers.
On this level,  what might have seemed demented to an outsider was often a highly effective  tactic for manipulating the NCLC membership.
For instance, when New Solidarity  said Kissinger had organized a "multimillion-dollar special counterintelligence  team" to combat LaRouche, this built up the NCLC's belief in LaRouche's status  as an international figure — a man so important that even the famous Kissinger  would stay up all night thinking about how to thwart him.
It also helped to  maintain the NCLC's siege mentality as an organization surrounded by  innumerable enemy agents.
Furthermore, the alleged machinations of Kissinger served as a convenient  explanation for NCLC setbacks.
When LaRouchian candidates did poorly in  elections, it was because of vote fraud arranged by Kissinger.
When an NCLC  member defected, it was because agents of Kissinger had bribed him.
When a  journalist wrote a scathing article about LaRouche, it was because he was part of  a Kissinger psychological warfare network.
Thus, by a strange inversion, the  setbacks became a proof of the NCLC's success, for Kissinger would only bother  to do these things if the NCLC was a real and growing threat to the forces of evil.
Ultimately LaRouche's greatest gain from harassing Kissinger was in making an  example of him.
In powerful circles in Washington, New York, and Chicago,  many people became aware of how much the attacks had upset Kissinger and  disrupted his life.
And these people recognized just how few options were open  to him in fighting back.
He couldn't sue: That would just give the LaRouchians an  additional forum in which to attack him, as well as the opportunity to go  rummaging through his financial records in pretrial discovery.
He couldn't call a  press conference about LaRouche: That would just be dignifying the NCLC  leader's insidious charges (besides, LaRouche would respond with new and  nastier charges).
He couldn't have LaRouche arrested, since the NCLC chairman  acted mostly through intermediaries who either stayed within the law or engaged  in telephone mischief too petty to prosecute.
Thus did Kissinger's ordeal become an object lesson for anyone in authority who  might be tempted to stand up to LaRouche.
Each leaflet and each demonstration  helped to solidify LaRouche's public image as an unpredictable wild man who  refused to play by the rules.
The message — don't mess with Lyndon LaRouche —  was received loud and clear.
Along with his penchant for filing libel suits and  collecting dossiers on his enemies, LaRouche's anti-Kissinger campaign helps to  explain why, even in the late 1980s, he continued to enjoy a remarkable degree  of immunity from public criticism.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
PART FIVE: LaRouche's Private CIA   " Every conspiracy collapses eventually, because . . . of the  psychological likelihood that those who are superlatively clever at  deceiving others become equally clever at deceiving themselves.
Disinformation eats those who create it."
--ROBERT ANTON WILSON   Chapter Eighteen   The Billion-Dollar Brain   When indicted for obstruction of justice in 1987, LaRouclie was well prepared.
He had hired Bernard Fensterwald, Washington's premier attorney for wayward  spooks.
In addition to denying the charges outright, LaRouche and his  codefendants decided to use the "CIA defense" as other Fensterwald clients  (such as Edwin Wilson, the rogue agent who smuggled arms to Libya) had done.
The argument went as follows: We thought we were operating on behalf of the  government on instructions from high-level CIA officials.
But dishonest elements  in the CIA set us up, and now we are being hung out to dry.
We can prove this to  the jury if only the judge will order the CIA to turn over the relevant documents.
The prosecution's response was to depict the LaRouchians' intelligence  community ties as nonexistent.
It argued that three nobodies from Reading,  Pennsylvania, had pretended to be CIA agents to get consulting work from  LaRouche.
These hoaxsters simply invented government sources and wrote  fictitious reports out of thin air.
The Reading trio did indeed operate a scam.
However, the LaRouchians had a  history of extensive dealings with the intelligence community dating back over a  decade, entirely apart from this.
The NCLC first offered its services to the CIA in  1976.
A longtime CIA contract agent subsequently became LaRouche's security  adviser and meetings with several retired high-level CIA officials took place.
By  the early 1980s the LaRouchians enjoyed a wide range of contacts at the CIA,  the National Security Council, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the Drug  Enforcement Administration, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Admiral Bobby Ray Inman, former chief of the code-breaking National Security  Agency and a consummate intelligence professional, received a steady flow of  reports from the LaRouche organization while serving as CIA deputy director in  1981-83, He met personally with Lyn and Helga LaRouche in a little house on F  Street in Washington to discuss West Germany's peace movement.
After leaving     the CIA to head an electronics firm, he talked frequently on the phone with  LaRouche security staffers, who regarded him as their "rabbi" and hoped that  someday he would become CIA director.
Former LaRouche security aide Charles  Tate, in his testimony as a prosecution witness in Boston, described taking the  incoming calls from Inman to security chief Jeff Steinberg.
Tate also claims to  have chatted with Inman personally.
(Inman's version is that he was merely the  victim of a constant bombardment of phone calls from Steinberg, whom he did  his best to evade.
He believes the LaRouchians were attempting to use him to  "establish their importance.")
Dr. Norman Bailey, senior NSC director of international economic affairs, met  several times with the LaRouchians in 1982-83, including at least three times  with LaRouche.
After leaving the NSC he told NBC-TV that LaRouche had "one  of the best private intelligence services in the world."
Some people suggested  Bailey was naive, but he qualifies as a specialist in international politics as well  as economics.
Brought into the NSC by Richard Allen, he had some  acquaintance with the world of covert operations.
In the mid-1970s he acted as a  supposed business consultant in the Azores when the CIA was preparing for a  separatist coup if Portugal went Communist.
As a scholar, one of his chief  interests was political cultism.
He wrote on the role of Opus Dei (a right-wing  Catholic society that practices flagellation) in fighting communism in the  Portuguese- and Spanish-speaking world.
And certainly Bailey was well aware of  the extremism of the LaRouchians, having sued them in the mid-1970s when  they accused him of being a "fascist."
Richard Morris, executive assistant to Judge William Clark when the latter was  President Reagan's National Security Adviser, met with LaRouche several times,  and with LaRouche aides on numerous other occasions.
He set up meetings for  LaRouche with other top NSC officials, including Dr. Ray Pollock.
Such meetings  could not have taken place without Clark's approval.
In the mid-1970s the LaRouchians tried to cultivate General Daniel Graham,  chief of the Defense Intelligence Agency, and General George Keegan, former  chief of Air Force intelligence.
LaRouche's ideology put them off, but they both  recall his followers as being remarkably well informed.
Graham cited an instance  when the LaRouchians provided sensitive information on Angola and  Mozambique that was unavailable from normal sources.
Keegan noted their  uncanny nose for the latest military technology.
LaRouche also impressed some European intelligence officials.
Brigadier  General Paul-Albert Scherer, former chief of counterintelligence for the West  German armed forces, recalled in a 1987 speech how intelligence experts in the  late 1970s were "amazed at his connections and his access to special  information on terrorism, the drug scene, the intelligence services themselves,  and on the details of developments in the East bloc countries and in the Middle  East."
Scherer said that when the LaRouchians asked him to work with them, he     checked with "friendly intelligence circles" (apparently the CIA) to see if this  would pose security risks.
"The fact that I did take [the LaRouchians] up, and can  speak publicly about it here, says enough," he pointed out.
Through the years the LaRouchians developed a reputation among investigative  reporters as well as intelligence mavens for their access to occasionally stunning  pieces of information.
The best illustration is Executive Intelligence Review's  scoop on important aspects of the Iran-Contra affair in the spring of 1986, many  months before the major media learned about it from a Lebanese daily.
An EIR  special report asserted in March that a journalist and National Security Council  consultant named Michael Ledeen had visited Israel to negotiate a "massive  expansion of Israeli arms sales" to unnamed "U.S. allies" whom the Reagan  administration "feared to openly arm."
Two months later, EIR predicted that a  major scandal would soon break, implicating "the U.S. State Department, high  Pentagon officials, top figures within the Israeli defense and intelligence  establishment, and the Soviet government--in the arming of Ayatollah Khomeini's  war machine...." The article provided three key names: Yaacov Nimrodi, an arms  dealer and former Israeli military attache to Iran under the Shah; Al Schwimmer,  founding president of Israel Aircraft Industries; and Cyrus Hashemi, a New York-  based Iranian banker.
Except for the reference to the Soviets, this was close to the target.
The major  media belatedly confirmed in November and December that Israeli involvement  in the affair resulted from a 1985 meeting between Prime Minister Shimon Peres  and Michael Ledeen, and that Schwimmer and Nimrodi acted as the key Israeli  intermediaries.
As to Hashemi, it turned out that he had participated in early  discussions with Iranian middleman Manucher Ghorbanifar and General Richard  Secord's business partner, Albert Hakim.
(In July 1986, Hashemi died under  mysterious circumstances.
U.S. Senate investigators have speculated that he  was murdered because he knew too much.)
The NCLC's intelligence-gathering prowess of the mid-1980s was the fruit of  hundreds of members working at it devotedly for over ten years.
LaRouche had  first raised the idea of an NCLC intelligence arm in meetings with his top aides in  1 971 .
He proposed that it be set up "along the lines of a 'desk' organization of a  major national newsweekly."
What eventually emerged was a highly profitable  weekly newsmagazine, a global spider's web of confidential sources, and one of  the world's largest collections of private political files and dossiers, compiled  through novel but effective snooping tactics.
By 1976 the NCLC had established a smoothly functioning intelligence  headquarters in New York, with branches in several European and Latin  American cities.
Three interlocking units emerged: the intelligence division  proper, which mostly did telephone research and monitored the foreign press; the  science unit, which operated out of separate offices through the Fusion Energy     Foundation; and the security staff, wliicli worked on sensitive matters sucli as tine  [Harassment of LaRouclie's opponents.
Tine intelligence division was designed by NCLC member Uwe Henke von  Parpart, a former West German naval cadet who claimed to have worked at  NATO headquarters in the 1960s.
In its early years it was more like a spoof of a  government spy agency.
The various "sectors" and "files" representing different  regions of the world were crammed into a three-floor complex in a factory  building on West Twenty-ninth Street in Manhattan.
It was a rabbit warren of  shabby offices, such as the "Southern Cone" room, where LaRouche disciples  pored over newspapers from Argentina and Chile.
When I visited in 1977, dozens  of young people in rummage-sale clothing sat hunched over WATS line phones  amidst a surrealistic clatter of the telex machine and typewriters.
There was a  smog-like atmosphere from chain smoking.
When an ashtray became full, the  contents were simply dumped on the floor.
No one had swept up in days.
The  bathrooms were also in a state of neglect, and the walls were devoid of any  decoration.
One sensed that the members were so intent on their political tasks  that they didn't even notice their surroundings.
The intelligence division was supposed to function with Parpart's Prussian  efficiency.
Each morning the sector heads deployed their underlings on the basis  of instructions from the National Executive Committee.
Many of them spent long  hours on the phone with news reporters, government officials.
Wall Street  experts, or college professors to "profile" their thinking and pick up tips.
A report  on each conversation was filed and cross-filed for future use.
Other members  clipped newspaper articles, prepared translations from European papers, or  conducted searches of the already voluminous files.
The more enterprising  scooted uptown to the New York Public Library to research the pedigrees of  British aristocrats.
The result was worked up as daily sector reports and further  distilled into the daily "briefing" on the world situation, which was given final  approval at the NEC meeting held each evening in the "war room" (a small  conference room with a shabby carpet).
The text of the briefing was turned over  to the communications sector to be telexed overnight to all regional and overseas  offices, so that a copy would be in the hands of every LaRouchian in the world  the next day.
"The ferocity with which they pursue intelligence is almost beyond  the ken of outsiders," said a former NCLC security staffer, who described the  organization as a "cult of intelligence."
Some defectors have said that LaRouche's brainwashing was what kept them in  the offices twelve to sixteen hours a day.
In part this was true.
Members also  endured a certain amount of psychological bullying from martinet types in the  leadership.
But many NCLC members had fun playing spook.
LaRouche gave  them titles like "intelligence officer," "sector chief" and "counterintelligence  director."
He told them they were part of a secret elite that would ultimately-  indeed, soon~be called on to save the nation.
Security staffers could thus  imagine a five-minute phone conversation with a Pentagon public affairs officer     as being Stage One of the global triumph of Neoplatonic humanism.
They  developed an extraordinary persistence and chutzpah: They would keep calling  and calling a selected military officer or Wall Street banker until he agreed to talk  to them.
The national intelligence staff's work was supplemented in a somewhat less  organized fashion by the regional NCLC staffs, which sent to New York daily  telex reports regarding their local organizing and snooping.
When I asked a  LaRouche aide in 1978 about the policies of the White House Office of Drug  Abuse Policy, he referred me to an Ohio NCLC member, who had detailed  information about the role of drug experts close to the administration in lobbying  for a drug decriminalization bill in the Ohio legislature.
The Ohio NCLC member  referred me to a top Cincinnati police official, who confirmed the story and was as  impressed with the LaRouchians' information as I was--he had gone to Columbus  at their urging to lobby against the bill (When I checked the story with the bill's  sponsor, I found it was all true, and more.)
In 1974 three NCLC members incorporated the New Solidarity International  Press Service (NSIPS), and the various LaRouchian intelligence offices in the  United States and overseas were renamed as NSIPS news bureaus.
This  provided light journalistic cover-press passes and easy access to officials who  otherwise might not have given them the time of day.
The NSIPS invested in a  telex network to link its offices and began publishing an intelligence newsletter to  supplement the NCLC's New Solidarity.
From the outset, this cost millions of  dollars a year, and where LaRouche obtained start-up capital of this magnitude  has never been adequately explained.
As the money poured in, the newsletter  was turned into Executive Intelligence Review, an attractively printed weekly  newsmagazine along the lines envisioned by LaRouche in 1971.
The NCLC  intelligence director, Nick Syvriotis (real name Criton Zoakos), took the title of  EIR editor-in-chief, and the various intelligence division sector chiefs became the  EIR intelligence "directors" in their respective areas.
Field research was done by NCLC organizers (like the young man in Ohio) and  by reporters for LaRouche publications.
NSIPS gained White House press  accreditation during the Ford administration, and both Carter and Reagan  repeatedly took questions from them at presidential press conferences.
EIR  reporters sought interviews with public figures (and, even more important, with  obscure experts) all over the world.
The publication opened news bureaus in  major foreign capitals, eventually establishing bureaus in thirteen cities from  Bangkok to Stockholm that collected news as busily as their mainstream media  competitors.
The effect was incremental.
By the early 1980s, LaRouche operatives had been  working the phones seven days a week for almost ten years, calling hundreds of  contacts a day from New York headquarters and the regional and overseas  offices.
They had conducted hundreds of face-to-face interviews a year with     influential people in Washington and around the world.
Winnowing through this  mass of names and faces, they had found individuals who, either because of  naivete, vanity, closet-fascist proclivities, or most often simply a desire to trade  information, became part of the "briefing network"--a list that was phoned  regularly for exchanges of gossip on a first-name basis.
Meanwhile, the security staff made thousands of undercover phone calls to the  "enemy": left-wing activists, liberal Democratic Party politicians, and Jewish  leaders.
The reports on the most fruitful phone calls were filed away in what the  LaRouchians called "raw and semi-finished files."
Snippets of information from  these files could then be traded with police detectives, investigative reporters,  scholars, the Ku Klux Klan, and European and Third World intelligence agencies.
The LaRouche organization's effectiveness was not just a result of collecting  masses of data.
It also was a matter of intelligence analysis.
Even prior to the  Reagan administration, EIR developed an underground reputation on Wall Street  and among some government people for its maverick focus on important issues  which the major media were ignoring, such as beam weapons research and the  international "debt bomb."
Sooner or later LaRouche twisted every analysis to fit  into his anti-Semitic worldview, but the original groundwork retained its validity,  and EIR staff writers were skilled at keeping factual analysis and propaganda  separate when necessary.
LaRouche had launched his organization in the late  1960s by recruiting from the best and brightest on elite college campuses and  among well-educated upper-class youth in Europe and Latin America, They  might not have been streetwise, but they were probably smarter in an  iconoclastic academic sense than their civil service counterparts at the CIA.
They  read a wide range of foreign languages, thereby giving the organization access  to news reports generally unavailable to anyone outside the intelligence  community or academic research institutes.
They also knew how to squeeze the  last clue out of research library special collections.
Several possessed, like  LaRouche himself, acute analytic minds.
NEC member Fernando Quijano  produced "The Coming Bloodbath in Chile," a 1972 New Solidarity article that  explained with compelling logic how and why Salvador Allende would be  overthrown.
David Goldman and other members contributed research in the late  1970s on the IMF and the "debt bomb" which LaRouche synthesized into  Operation Juarez, a report designed to influence government officials and  economists throughout Latin America.
In the midst of the Falklands war in 1982,  Uwe Parpart produced an analysis of Argentina's strategic blunders (based in  part on Argentine government sources) that was far superior to the mainstream  media's coverage.
According to LaRouche, revenues from EIR sales and other NSIPS activities  reached $4 million in 1979.
This presumably included EIR's subscribers paying  $396 for their annual subscriptions, (Some members of the briefing network  received it free.)
LaRouche was out to develop a select readership rather than  mass circulation.
EIR served basically as a come-on for more expensive spin-off     products such as book-length special reports ($250 each), the weekly  Confidential Alert ($3,500 a year), secret reports for individual clients (upwards of  $10,000), and annual retainer services (whatever the traffic would bear).
LaRouche's West German organization launched the weekly Middle East Insider,  which boasted of "reports from the Middle East and North Africa that no one else  dares to publish."
The NCLC intelligence division would have been impressive enough if it had  been simply a United States-based operation.
However LaRouche operatives  overseas worked just as hard to build up briefing networks and compile their own  files and dossiers, to which New York headquarters had full access.
In the early 1960s LaRouche had aspired to found a Fifth International to replace  the Trotskyist Fourth International.
What he ended up building was the  International Caucus of Labor Committees (ICLC), a network including the  NCLC, the Mexican Labor Party, the North American Labor Party (today the  Party for the Commonwealth of Canada, dedicated to dumping Queen Elizabeth  as ceremonial head of state), the Andean Labor Party with branches in Peru and  Colombia, and the European Labor Party with branches in Italy, France, West  Germany, Denmark, and Sweden, The combined membership outside the United  States is probably no more than 1 ,000, yet these foreign LaRouchians are, like  their American counterparts, talented, educated, and well funded.
Each member  organization has, like the NCLC, an electoral arm, propaganda organs, and local  fund-raising sources.
Each also has plenty of corporate shells and private bank  accounts into which funds from the United States, brought over by courier, can  disappear without a trace.
Finally, each has its own intelligence division (the local  EIR "bureau") which develops information-trading relationships with the local  police and military, thus multiplying the amount of information available to the  NCLC intelligence division whenever it is preparing a confidential report to  impress some CIA or other government official.
Especially important is the Wiesbaden intelligence command center.
Wiesbaden  is the headquarters of the European Labor Party, and LaRouche has a villa  nearby.
Already in the early 1970s the ELP's German contingent began to  cultivate military and intelligence officials.
Defectors say that LaRouche aides  met with the late Reinhard Gehlen, Hitler's Eastern Front military intelligence  chief, who, after the war, founded the BND, West Germany's version of the CIA,  and staffed it largely with former SS officers.
Gehlen was already retired from the  spy business when he met with the LaRouchians.
He reportedly found them still  too leftwing to be taken seriously.
According to Charles Allen, a well-known writer  on Nazi war criminals and German revanchism, the LaRouchians had more  success with the BND after their swing to the right.
They also nuzzled up to  military counterintelligence, which was headed in the mid-1970s by General  Scherer, who would become, after his retirement, a close personal friend of  LaRouche.
The director of LaRouche's German intelligence staff, Anno Hellenbroich, is the  younger brother of Heribert Hellenbroich, chief of West Germany's Federal  Bureau of Constitutional Protection (BfV) from 1981 to 1985.
The BfV, West  Germany's equivalent of the FBI, supposedly watches extremist groups but  removed the LaRouche organization from its list.
Heribert told Der Spiegel that it  wasn't extremist enough and besides.
Anno had assured him it was not anti-  Semitic.
From its inception the European Labor Party concentrated much of its energy on  tracking, compiling dossiers on, and harassing politicians in Germany and  Scandinavia who were critics of U.S. policy or advocates of Ostpolitik.
They  conducted a smear campaign against former Chancellor Willy Brandt, putting up  posters depicting him in a Nazi storm trooper uniform with a swastika prominently  displayed.
(Brandt sued them and won.)
In 1982-83 the ELP went after Petra Kelly, leader of Germany's Green Party and  a strong advocate of removing U.S. missiles from German soil.
Various smear  articles called her a Communist, a terrorist, and sexually promiscuous.
An article  entitled "Did You See This Whore on Television?"
described her alleged affairs  with married men.
She sued the LaRouchians for libel in New York federal court.
Her attorney, former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark, said the LaRouchians  had engaged in a "vicious campaign that made it difficult for her to appear in  public.
The campaign became physical at times.
They cornered her on a train,  they shoved her grandmother around.
...They abused her most fundamental  rights of privacy, dignity, physical integrity, and reputation."
The LaRouchians also built up a strong intelligence apparatus in Paris, where the  head of the ELP branch was Jacques Cheminade, a former Foreign Ministry  official.
In 1984 the Paris ELP publicly disclosed a classified French cabinet  memo discussing possible links between the LaRouchians and the KGB.
The  disclosure created a minor flap over government security, since the memo had  been distributed to fewer than a dozen top French officials.
Whoever leaked it  had to have access to a wide range of government secrets.
(According to a CIA  memorandum on file in Boston federal court, LaRouche had boasted of his  French presidential palace sources at a meeting at CIA headquarters a year  before this incident.)
LaRouche came to regard himself as a spymaster of the highest skill.
In a 1979  report he rated nine of the world's major intelligence services, distinguishing  between what they really know and what they report to their nation's leaders.
(In  his view, which is probably accurate, spy agencies a/i/zays withhold information  from their own government leaders.)
He claimed to take into account not just  official agencies such as the CIA and the KGB, but each nation's total intelligence  capability, "a mixture of private, official, and semi-official institutions," implicitly  suggesting that the NCLC should be considered part of the team.
He placed the  NCLC's three great "enemies"~Great Britain, Israel, and the Swiss bankers~at     the top in terms of quality of l<nowledge.
In terms of quality of information  released, he rated the United States at the bottom.
Apparently he was  suggesting a pressing need for his services and was petulant that the CIA was  not reciprocating his flow of reports.
LaRouche tried to instill in NCLC members a sense of superiority over the CIA  and other government intelligence agencies.
He boasted that the NCLC often  outperforms "those poor, plodding philistines, with their morose sense of a  careerist's sort of duty, and their hunt-and-peck methods of deduction."
The CIA  thinks "arithmetically," but the NCLC reasons "geometrically."
In general, CIA  agents lack culture, A proper intelligence agent should be steeped in poetry,  because intelligence is poetry.
Agents should be "trained in Kepler, Leibnitz,  Monge, Carnal, and the methods of Alexander von Humboldt's proteges at Berlin  and Gottingen.
.
.
Greek classics, music..."   LaRouche's most revealing article on espionage is couched in the form of a short  story, "The Day the Bomb Went Off."
On the surface, it is intended to indoctrinate  his followers in cultish views, and the hero is LaRouche himself.
But on a deeper  level the story is a satire that pokes fun at its author, his associates, his  epistemology, the CIA, and the entire zany world of espionage.
Whether or not  the satire is entirely conscious is anyone's guess, but like LaRouche's writings on  brainwashing, it suggests he cannot be dismissed as a paranoid kook in the grip  of uncontrollable compulsions.
Inside LaRouche there is certainly a mind of  extraordinary cunning, laughing at all the suckers and even at himself.
The story depicts an imaginary crisis facing the NCLC intelligence division.
The  security staff hears on the radio that a bomb threat has been received by the  Chicago Sun-Times and that its offices have been evacuated.
They call the  Chicago police, nothing.
They call the Federal Emergency Management Agency,  nothing.
They call each other, nothing.
Then they call LaRouche.
No one gives  him a single fact to go on, but he uses his famous "hypothesis of the higher  hypothesis": "Let us assume," he says, puffing on his pipe, "there is a suspect  who signed a blackmail note....Let's assume he's a talented technologist...."  LaRouche goes on to infer that this villain is suffering from "megalomania" and is  "trying to reorder world events with the aid of some clever sort of infernal  machine."
Confirmation of LaRouche's theory comes weeks later, in the form of  subtle inferences from a remark by a CIA cutout to a LaRouche aide in  Washington.
Not only was LaRouche right, but also Henry Kissinger was  involved!
LaRouche then proceeds to his exegesis.
There is a "special etiquette" in the  intelligence "demimonde" where things function "by indirection, when not outright  misdirection."
What's really going on can only be known by inference, but is  nevertheless a certainty.
If the NCLC wants to transmit information to the CIA, all  they have to do is mention it on the phone to some third party.
The National  Security Agency, which taps everyone's phone anyway, will record it and pass it     on.
Likewise, if tine CIA wants to send a message to LaRouclie, tliey will instruct  some undercover spook to mention the item to a third party known to be in touch  with LaRouche.
The third party will not know he is being used as a cutout.
Only  the CIA chiefs and LaRouche himself will know what's rea//y going down--the  former through direct knowledge, and the latter through inferences based on  Neoplatonic philosophv.
[FOOTNOTE 1]   One can instantly see the usefulness of this theory for NCLC morale.
It invests  the membership's daily toil with an invisible significance--something like the  drudgery of medieval monks surrounded by invisible angels and devils.
Lest the  outside reader conclude that LaRouche is insanely serious, he appends a  seemingly irrelevant note about quarks, those elusive particles of subatomic  physics.
"The most interesting thing about quarks," he says, "is that they do not  exist.
No physicist has ever conducted an experiment in which the effect of a  quark's existence occurred.
...The function which the quark performs is to fill a  'logical hole' in the schematic representation of physics...."   Once quarks infiltrate one's spy organization, Robert Ludlum and Richard  Condon cannot be far behind (not to speak of L. Ron Hubbard and E. Howard  Hunt).
In fact, LaRouche and his top aides take spy novels seriously and act  them out in the world of real spookery.
LaRouche wrote in 1974 that the "best  qualified CIA 'covert operations' planning executives are to be found among hack  paperback novelists."
A 1981 New Solidarity review of Ludlum's The Bourne Identity po'\r\\e6 out that  "many espionage writers" write stories as "proposed scenarios for actual  intelligence operations, or as 'disinformation' to cover up operations."
Wall Street  economist Michael Hudson recalls being told by a top LaRouche aide that  Ludlum's fictional cabal of Corsican gangsters and Italian aristocrats in The  Matarese Circle actually exists.
LaRouche himself has repeatedly claimed that  Edgar Allan Poe was a full-time intelligence agent and that Poe's mystery stories  contain cryptic references to real-life operations, LaRouche's 1974 Christopher  White brainwashing hoax was inspired in large part by Condon's The Manchurian  Candidate and the movie version of Len Deighton's The Ipcress File.
Former LaRouche followers have pointed out the uncanny similarities between  his conception of the NCLC and General Midwinter's super-rightist spy outfit in  Deighton's The Billion-Dollar Brain: Midwinter hires contract agents, devises a  computerized system for planning operations, goes into competition with NATO  intelligence agencies, and is put out of business by LaRouche's number one  enemy, British intelligence.
The most startling parallels to LaRouche's operation are found in The Intercom  Conspiracy, a novel by Eric Ambler, whose sardonic view of spookery generally  resembles that of LaRouche.
It is the story of two raffish NATO spooks who buy  an EIR-type newsletter.
Intercom World Intelligence Network, and use it to leak     intelligence secrets embarrassing to both East and West.
(Significantly, The  Intercom Conspiracy i\rs\ appeared in paperback in December 1970, only a few  months before LaRouche announced his plan to found EIR.)
After creating havoc  for several months, the fictional duo hold an auction to sell Intercom to whichever  embarrassed agency will pay the most to stop the flow of information.
Ambler's satire is filled with terms that well fit the LaRouchians: "paper mill" (an  organization specializing in disinformation and ideological slander), "shopping  window" (a newsletter used to give hints of intelligence items for sale), and "play  material" (low-grade classified information leaked through paper mills for various  Byzantine purposes).
Whether or not EIR's editors really have as much classified information as  Ambler's two rogues, they like to give the impression they do.
EIR's international  news briefs column often includes snippets similar to those in The Intercom  Conspiracy.
For instance, in the EIR dated May 12, 1981, an item from a  "[Persian] Gulf intelligence source": "The British government is secretly extending  offers to the Saudi Arabian government to sell the Saudis the British-made  Nimrod radar aircraft system if the U.S. Congress forces the Reagan  administration to back down on its offer to sell AW ACS to the Saudis...." Or from  the July 29, 1980, issue: "A secret component of the recent U.S. -British deal over  Trident missiles involves the stationing of nuclear weapons on Diego Garcia in  the Indian Ocean, according to confidential sources.
Included in the Trident deal  is an unwritten agreement by Britain to provide a 'supplementary Rapid  Deployment Force' to back up Washington's RDF in deployments into the  Persian Gulf."
But LaRouche's followers in the early 1980s went far beyond anything in The  Intercom Conspiracy y\ihen they started publishing hot tips on how to make H-  bombs and death rays in league with Dr. Friedwardt Winterberg, a character as  odd as anyone in an Ambler novel.
Besides his political activities as a nemesis of  the Justice Department's Office of Special Investigations, Winterberg is also a  brilliant research physicist.
According to Edward Teller, he has "perhaps not  received the attention he deserves" for his work on fusion.
For the LaRouchians,  he is a unique commodity~his value resides in what he lacks.
What Winterberg  lacks is a clearance.
He therefore cannot be accused of leaking classified  information.
As a physicist, he can always say he rediscovered the information  on his own in his Nevada desert laboratory.
In fact, he does indeed figure out the  principles of secret weapons on his own.
It is his hobby, just as other people  breed hamsters.
Winterberg sincerely believes that it is ridiculous to classify such  matters, for the essence of science is the free flow of information.
In 1981  LaRouche's Fusion magazine published Winterberg's diagrams of various  devices, such as a "Nuclear X-Ray Laser Weapon Using Thermonuclear  Explosives."
Later that year, the FEF published his Physical Principles of  Thermonuclear Explosive Devices, a how-to manual on H-bombs, with the  neutron bomb thrown in as a bonus.
Of course, the LaRouchians had been hinting at such knowledge ever since they  set up the FEF in 1974.
Predictably, they strove to develop ties with governments  desirous of becoming the next nuclear power: India, Iraq, South Africa,  Argentina, Taiwan, and Libya.
Government nuclear experts in at least two of  these countries (India and Argentina) have met with FEF representatives, and  the foundation and EIR have arranged speaking tours for Dr. Winterberg.
In the  wake of the how-to manual, EIR seminars in Washington and European capitals  were well attended by appropriately obscure diplomatic clerks from various Third  World embassies, with Mossad agents discreetly blending into the background.
[1] LaRouche added an extra twist in later writings, presenting the indirect  transmittal of information from and to the NCLC as having a deep operational  significance.
It was, he suggested, the means by which the organization  participated directly, as a kind of switchboard, in secret deals between the CIA  and the KGB and in all kinds of disinformation games, counterintelligence  probes, and dog and pony shows.
To play in this game, EIR's staff members  merely had to go about their daily routine and let the National Security Agency  record what happened.
But LaRouche changed his tune while preparing for his  1988 trial.
His attorney made a Freedom of Information Act request to the  National Security Agency for any records of electronic or other types of  surveillance of the LaRouchians.
The NSA responded that it had files on the  Schiller Institute, but declined to turn them over on national security grounds.
In  spite of LaRouche's previous eagerness to be bugged, he now said it proved  there was a government conspiracy against him.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Nineteen   Intrigue on Five Continents   According to Admiral Inman, tine CIA suffered in the early 1980s from an  intelligence "vacuum" in some parts of the world because of the Carter  administration's cutbacks.
This made it tempting to deal with private groups like  LaRouche's.
They were not the only such group around; the Unification Church  was also in the private spy business, as were various rightist outfits supplying the  Nicaraguan Contras.
But LaRouche's snoops employed unusual techniques with  especially intriguing results.
"They are like ferrets," said the NSC's Norman  Bailey, adding that they sometimes induced high-level foreign officials to "open  up."
Richard Morris also noted this.
He cited LaRouchian reports to the NSC on  meetings with government officials in Latin America and the People's Republic of  China.
For national security reasons, neither Bailey nor Morris would be more  specific.
The "ferrets" were EIR correspondents who roamed the world interviewing  hundreds of important persons each year.
A subject would see a copy of EIR  with an attractive cover and a masthead listing as many news bureaus as Time  or Newsweek, and would assume it was an important American magazine.
Many  who rarely, if ever, had been interviewed by the U.S. media were glad for the  opportunity to send a message to the American public.
Some of those  interviewed were susceptible to LaRouchian political views and would be  particularly forthcoming with respect to such pet topics as debt repudiation.
Others proved open to some kind of information-trading or consulting  arrangement.
They would be drawn into the NCLC's international briefing  network as intelligence sources and/or "organic-humanist" allies.
In a 1986  interview, LaRouche boasted of having such ties with government officials or  members of the "Establishment" in about fifty countries.
During 1982 (when the CIA, according to Admiral Inman, was receiving a  continuous "flow of materials" from the LaRouchians), EIR published interviews  with former Venezuelan President Carlos Andres Perez, Argentine Foreign  Minister Nicanor Costa Mendez, Vietnamese Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach,  Spanish Defense Minister Alberto Oliart, Japanese industrialist and Mitsubishi  Research Institute chairman Masaki Nakajima, and former Iranian Prime Minister  Shahpour Bakhtiar (in exile in Paris).
Other interviewees included the foreign  ministers of Panama, Peru, Colombia, Ecuador, and Malaysia, the Brazilian  Planning Minister, the president of Brazil's Senate, the head of Petrobas (Brazil's  state oil company), the Bangladesh Finance Minister, the chief of Argentina's  National Atomic Energy Commission, and the permanent secretary of the Latin  American Economic System (SELA).
EIR correspondents also met with hundreds     of lower-level officials, trade union leaders, and businessmen executives that the  local U.S. embassy or CIA might never have had contact with or who would be  reluctant to open up with official U.S. representatives.
A unique file of dossiers  and profiles was thus compiled by the NCLC for its own use and that of its  clients, including above all the intelligence agencies.
The LaRouchians strove for direct ties with the government of a targeted country,  either on its home ground or through its Washington embassy or New York UN  mission.
If an embassy official liked their product, they would offer to provide  various public relations and dirty tricks/smear services.
They never bothered to  register with the U.S. Justice Department under the Foreign Agents Registration  Act nor did the Justice Department pressure them to do so.
Defectors say the  organization prepared research materials for at least a dozen governments, as  well as Japanese multinational corporations.
Besides the nuclear-bomb aspirants  already named, the clients reportedly included French and Italian intelligence  agencies, Iran (under the Shah) and Saudi Arabia.
The name of the game was  opportunism.
While working for Panamanian strongman Manuel Noriega, they  peddled anti-drug trafficking reports in Colombia and Peru.
While endorsing right-  wing military terror in Guatemala, they provided information to Washington,  D.C.'s left-wing Christie Institute for its lawsuit against LaRouche's longtime  detractor General Singlaub, whom Christie attorneys accused of involvement in  Contra terrorism.
Sometimes reports for foreign governments were prepared for cash, other times  as a calculated political move to gain new contacts or a specific political favor.
EIR operatives were able to arrange personal meetings for LaRouche with  several chiefs of state as well as cabinet ministers, generals, and admirals.
Over  the years his catches included Mexican President Lopez Portillo, Indian Prime  Minister Indira Gandhi (twice), Argentine President Raul Alfonsin, and Turkish  Prime Minister Turgut Ozal.
Although some NCLC defectors have suggested  these meetings were merely a sop to LaRouche's vanity, he profited from them  concretely.
A report with photographs of the meeting would be published in EIR  and other LaRouche publications in the United States to show wealthy but naive  senior citizens (the chief targets of LaRouchian fund raising) that LaRouche was  truly a statesman of world stature.
If the LaRouchians were able to attract the attention of CIA bureaucrats, it was all  the easier to gain the interest of the low-budget intelligence services of some  developing nations.
Information pyramiding was fairly easy.
A LaRouchian might  pick up an interesting rumor from a telephone conversation with a low-level  diplomat at embassy A.
He could then call up his contact at embassy B and tell  him what he had learned.
In return, he might receive another piece of gossip or  conjecture.
He could then move on to embassies C and D, multiplying his  pennies like the lad in the pluck-and-luck story.
One key was that much of the  valuable intelligence floating around the world is neither classified nor secret, but  merely obscure.
Whoever bothers to dig it out gains leverage if he can determine     (as the LaRouchians apparently are able to do) which corporations or  governments would be most interested in a given piece of information.
LaRouche's conspiracy theories to a certain extent give him an advantage in  peddling and collecting intelligence overseas.
Such theories are an important  part of the political culture in many countries.
His followers are thus able to  instinctively tap into moods and undercurrents that might be missed by an  American Foreign Service officer who deals with people on a more rational and  pragmatic level.
Certainly an official in Saudi Arabia or Pakistan, where the anti-  Semitic Protocols of the Elders ofZion have long been popular, is not likely to  raise an eyebrow over LaRouche's arcane charges about British-Jewish bankers.
Nor are Latin American daily newspapers, which often purvey tales of CIA  machinations and flying saucers, likely to be altogether skeptical of wild tales  about Henry Kissinger.
And the public in, say, Colombia-where political and  drug-related assassinations are frequent occurrences-could well believe that  narcotics traffickers or terrorists were out to kill LaRouche.
The factor of sheer ignorance about the United States was manifest in a 1975  Iraqi request to the LaRouchians for a background report on the National  Renaissance Party, James Madole's tiny New York storm trooper outfit.
The  Iraqis were considering funding the NRP as a propaganda asset.
The  LaRouchians reported back that the NRP was an isolated group unlikely to be  useful.
But the fact that a Middle East country could even consider working with  the NRP revealed a profound naivete about American politics.
The primary LaRouchian tactic in dealing with foreign governments was to tell  them just what they wanted to hear.
This was at the heart of LaRouche's  agitation with regard to the Third World debt crisis.
Nations such as Brazil owed  the New York banks billions of dollars, and LaRouche's advice was simple  (foreshadowing his own tactics with creditors in the mid-1980s): Don't pay, put  them off with promises, threaten them with the debt bomb; after all, they're just a  bunch of shylocks.
LaRouche became known as an Important Economist, and  government officials quoted Operation Juarez.
As friends of "Ibero-America" his  EIR intelligence profilers enjoyed an open door to high officials.
Peru's President  Alan Garcia, already a populist on the debt question, even addressed a Schiller  Institute delegation in Lima.
The LaRouchians also used flattery.
Sometimes they praised the strongman of a  government being courted (e.g., Noriega or Zaire's Mobutu).
Usually they praised  great achievements and men of a country's past.
For instance, knowing that Arab  governments are especially sensitive about racist Western stereotypes of their  culture (camels, harems, and terrorists), the LaRouchians produced eloquent  studies on the glories of medieval Islam, ascribing world-historical importance to  the philosopher Avicenna.
They launched an Avicenna Institute, staged an  Avicenna conference, and published an Avicenna issue of their theoretical  magazine.
The Campaigner.
Another variation was to appear to take sides in liistoric rivalries between  selected nations or nationalities, as in supporting the Argentinians over the Brits  in 1982, or the Hindus over the Sikhs.
After Indira Gandhi was assassinated by  her Sikh bodyguards in 1984, the EIR staff wrote Derivative Assassination: Who  Killed Indira Gandhi?
The book's footnotes listed numerous interviews with Sikh  leaders in various countries, which suggested that it was a spin-off from an  intelligence report for the Indian government.
In its published form it appeared in  part to be propaganda to keep the Sikhs from gaining public sympathy in  Canada, where they are an important immigrant group.
It also appeared to be  aimed at readers in India, especially Hindu nationalists who would read about the  book's allegations in the daily press.
Derivative Assassination described the  Sikhs as tools of the Israelis and various rich Jews.
It also said the assassination  was organized by Israel's Mossad as part of a vast plot to sabotage Indian  nuclear power plants.
Given that Hindu rightists had run amok after Mrs.  Gandhi's death, slaughtering hundreds of Sikhs--and that the country remained  politically on a hair trigger--the book was a virtual invitation to further violence  against Sikhs, not to mention a pogrom against India's tiny Jewish population.
A less sinister example was EIR's cozying up to the Turks against the Greeks in  1987--an amusing choice, considering that EIR's editor-in-chief was Criton  Zoakos and the LaRouche organization had long idolized the Renaissance Greek  philosopher Plethon, apostle of total war against the Turks.
But LaRouche has  never let Neoplatonism stand in the way of opportunity.
He traveled to Ankara to  meet with Prime Minister Ozal, and afterward staged a press conference in which  he accused Greek Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou of being an alcoholic, a  Trotskyite, and a KGB agent.
He also criticized the Reagan administration as  "derelict" in that it wouldn't "supply this kind or that of military aid" (apparently  meaning high-tech weapons for Turkey) as well as more economic aid.
After  conferring with the U.S. embassy, the Turkish government admitted that  LaRouche had bamboozled it.
But he came out ahead, for his picture was taken  with a NATO head of state and published by EIR to impress his contributors back  home.
He could use it along with the 1980 picture of himself chatting with Ronald  Reagan in New Hampshire.
The LaRouchians have a special affinity for regimes that are tottering.
It is as if  the more desperate they are, the less closely they will look at LaRouche's  credentials.
In 1978, in the final months of the Shah's regime in Iran, they  peddled information to SAVAK, his secret police.
They also prepared a  confidential memorandum for the Shah on how to save his Peacock Throne.
Afterward, they maintained contact with the royal family and various Iranian  politicians in exile.
EIR staffer Robert Dreyfuss's Hostage to Khomeini {^980)  blamed the Shah's fall on the British oligarchy and its alleged treasonous  collaborators in Washington.
The book appealed to the irrationalism frequently  found among fallen elites, as for instance the anti-Semitic theories popular  among czarist exiles in Paris and Berlin after the Bolshevik revolution.
The  Shah's widow.
Empress Farah Diba Pahlevi, told the West German magazine     Bunte: "To understand what has gone on in Iran, one must read what Robert  Dreyfuss wrote in the Executive Intelligence Review."
EIR used this quote for  years afterward in its advertising.
When Philippine strongman Ferdinand Marcos's regime was disintegrating in the  fall of 1985, FEF spokesman Uwe Parpart and LaRouche's security chief, Paul  Goldstein, rushed over to Manila to advise him.
They took along Peru's former  Prime Minister General Edgardo Mercado Jarrin as the nominal head of their  Schiller Institute delegation, and the meeting with Marcos was widely reported in  the Philippine press.
According to LaRouche in a 1986 radio interview, his aides  warned Marcos: "They're going to coup you."
LaRouche claimed that if Marcos  "had taken the kinds of actions we'd recommended ... he would not have been  couped."
Shortly after the trip, Goldstein revealed the alleged evil force behind  Marcos's problems: Mossad and a cabal of Jewish businessmen.
When Polish Communist leader Edward Gierek was threatened by the Solidarity  trade union in 1 980, LaRouche prepared a document advising him on how to  crush the "Trotskyite insurrection" of "British intelligence's . . . Judas goats" (i.e.,  dumb Catholics led by smart Jews).
He told Gierek to crush the strikers the way  American cops crushed the ghetto riots of the 1960s.
"Use force to contain and  separate groups of rioters from one another and from uninvolved areas of the  population," he urged.
"Isolate and neutralize the agents provocateurs as  inconspicuously and quickly as possible, and let the dupes tire themselves back  into a normal state of mind."
General Wojciech Jaruzelski's Soviet-backed martial law regime did just that in  December 1981 when it rounded up and imprisoned tens of thousands of Poles.
The regime became an international pariah, but not to the LaRouchians.
They  were the only enthusiastic Jaruzelski supporters in the West, save for a few small  Moscow-financed CPs.
EIR and New Solidarity published dozens of pro-  Jaruzelski pieces, including the editorial "Don't Meddle in Poland," which claimed  that Solidarity was linked to Western intelligence agencies.
The AFL-CIO, which  had attempted to help Solidarity, was described as conducting "covert operations  targeted against the Polish nation-state."
Jaruzelski's "broad purge" was said to  be a necessary move to get rid of "hardcore British intelligence proteges."
Some NCLC propaganda appears simply to be aimed at cleaning up the public  image of regimes that have received negative U.S. press coverage.
Jeffrey  Steinberg, LaRouche security aide and EIR "counter-intelligence" editor, traveled  to Guatemala in 1985-86, accompanied at least once by a former Army  intelligence officer working as a LaRouche consultant.
They supposedly went  with government troops on a raid to destroy marijuana plantations, and EIR  published a special report co-authored by Steinberg, Soviet Unconventional  Warfare in Ibero-America: The Case of Guatemala.
It was a vigorous defense of  Guatemala's brutal army, and urged total war against leftists, Maryknoll priests,  and Indians in the highlands, all said to be involved in drug trafficking, gun     running, and assorted other criminal and subversive activities.
Tine report  accused Amnesty International, which had lambasted Guatemala's human rights  violations, of being a "support organization for Soviet-sponsored international  terrorism."
When Steinberg and his wife were indicted in Boston for obstruction of  justice the following year, they obtained a measure of support from Guatemalan  rightists.
The daily El Grafico carried an article on how "antidrug expert"  Steinberg had been framed by a "drug money laundering mafia."
According to  EIR, El Grafico stated that "those democrats [in the United States] who have  made so many campaigns about supposed violations of 'human rights' in other  countries, had no qualms about violating the human rights of the Steinberg  couple."
Perhaps the cleverest foray of EIR staffers was into Israel in 1986.
They conned  prominent figures by affecting support for Prime Minister Shimon Peres's plan to  bring peace to the Middle East via a multibillion-dollar Marshall Plan.
This was  just the type of grandiose scheme that the LaRouchians are most experienced at  packaging and promoting, thanks to LaRouche's real achievements as the  economist of total mobilization.
EIR even hinted that Peres's plan might have  been inspired by a 1983 LaRouche scheme along these lines.
(LaRouche had  traveled to Israel at least once to promote it.)
EIR published several laudatory  articles on the Peres plan, as well as interviews with Israeli officials.
When  LaRouche was quoted in a London-based Saudi Arabian newspaper in support  of the plan, EIR boasted that its "Israeli sources" regarded this article as "very  significant."
The stage was being set for a ten-day trip to Israel in June by two  EIR correspondents.
They would gain interviews with Economics and Planning  Minister Gad Ya'acobi, former bank of Israel governor Arnon Gafny, private  foundation officials, and members of the Knesset.
The EIR representatives' apparent friendliness toward Israel was in blatant  contradiction to the LaRouche organization's propaganda efforts in Washington  that summer to use the indictment of Israeli spy Jonathan Pollard to drive a  wedge between the United States and Israel (as by accusing the Israelis of  working with the Soviets).
But this wasn't the only apparent deception.
The EIR  correspondents while in Israel obtained interviews at the Armand Hammer Fund  by presenting themselves as friendly journalists.
Yet NCLC members back in  Leesburg had just completed a massive dossier on oil tycoon Hammer,  portraying him as a Soviet agent and an associate of mobsters.
(In a 1988 letter  to a journalist writing on Hammer, NCLC security staffer Scott Thompson claimed  to have gained information for the dossier via a series of interviews with the late  James Angleton, who for years was the CIA's liaison with Mossad.
Thompson  also said that an early version had been given to an unnamed foreign  government involved in negotiations with Hammer's Occidental Petroleum.)
The LaRouchians sold the government of Thailand on their expertise in  promoting grand economic designs.
In this case it was a plan to use atom bombs  to excavate a canal across the country at the Isthmus of Kra, so as to shorten the     route for oil tankers from the Persian Gulf to Japan, and perhaps stimulate Thai  industrial development along the way.
The plan had long been under  consideration by Japan's Mitsubishi Research Institute for its "global  infrastructure fund."
Powerful persons in Thailand became interested in  LaRouche's version, thanks to the influence of a wealthy couple, Pakdee and  Sophie Tanapura.
Pakdee Tanapura was the son of a Thai magnate who owned  vast tracts of land in the country's northeast.
The Tanapuras had bankrolled  LaRouche's European operation for years, and guaranteed an elite audience for  LaRouche when he traveled to Bangkok in October 1983 for a FEF-EIR Kra  Canal conference.
The Thai Minister of Communications and top military officers  turned out to hear him.
According to New Solidarity, "the warmest welcome . . .  came from the old Thai network" that "worked with the OSS in the region."
Kevin  Coogan, a former member of the NCLC Asia file, interprets this as a reference to  associates of the CIA-military "old boys" who ran the Nugan Hand Bank--the kind  of military officers LaRouche security adviser Mitchell WerBell would have  worked with when he was in Thailand in the late 1960s on CIA assignment.
In 1984 the Thai Communications Ministry co-sponsored a second FEF-EIR  conference, and LaRouche again traveled to Bangkok to meet with military  leaders.
When General Kriangsak Chomanan and four colleagues were jailed in  1985 for alleged involvement in a coup d'etat, the LaRouchians agitated for their  release.
New Solidarity claimed that they were being kept in jail as a result of  pressure from Henry Kissinger and other members of the so-called international  oligarchy.
But all was not lost.
In 1986 New Solidarity announced that the chief of  staff of the Thai Army had endorsed the Kra Canal project.
The best-documented relationship of the LaRouchians with a foreign government  was with South Africa.
In the late 1970s they met with South African diplomats in  New York and Washington, staged a conference to promote investment in South  Africa, and prepared intelligence reports on anti-apartheid groups for South  Africa's Bureau of State Security (BOSS).
At the time, BOSS was engaged in  LaRouche-style dirty tricks in Europe.
It also was conducting a secret influence-  buying and propaganda campaign in the United States and Europe financed by a  $74 million slush fund.
This fund, conduited through the regime's Department of  Information, was exposed in 1978 by South African opposition newspapers.
The  ensuing parliamentary scandal was dubbed "Muldergate," after the late Cornelius  Mulder, the Information Minister, who was forced to resign.
Members of the NCLC Africa file approached Johan Adier, information officer at  the New York consulate, in 1978.
They wanted "to be friendly," AdIer said.
He  sent an aide to the NCLC headquarters, and "they took him on a sort of grand  tour~he got the impression they wanted to sell him something."
Sure enough, the  LaRouchians later tried to sell intelligence materials to the consulate.
A similar  approach was made to the Washington embassy's information officer, Karl  Noffke, who said: "They wanted to alert us about certain forces they think are bad  for South Africa~the British, the Wall Street bankers, and so forth."
A LaRouche     representative also approached Les de Villiers, a former South African  information official whose name would feature prominently in Muldergate.
De  Villiers at the time was working for Sydney S. Baron & Co., a public relations firm  that was a registered agent for South Africa.
He said LaRouche's man offered to  help boost investment in South Africa.
Adier, Noffke, and de Villiers all said they rejected the proposals and did not pay  for the unsolicited materials they received.
But the NCLC security staff struck a  deal with BOSS by a different route.
Defectors say they were assigned to call up  U.S. anti-apartheid groups such as the American Committee on Africa and pump  them for information while posing as sympathetic freelance journalists.
The  callers were told by top LaRouche aides that the reports were intended for  BOSS.
This was later confirmed by The New York Times.
The reports included  profiles of U.S. and British anti-apartheid groups.
The LaRouchians meanwhile sent a special report in early 1977 to John McGoff,  an American newspaper publisher who was a close friend of Connie Mulder and  a major figure in the slush-fund scandal.
This report provided background on the  National News Council, the now-defunct newspaper industry ethics committee  that had been critical of McGoff, whom the LaRouchians were courting at the  time.
James Whelan, a former McGoff aide, recalled being "bombarded" with  phone calls from them.
After checking with McGoff, he humored them.
He read  over the National News Council report but found it worthless.
(It said the NNC  was part of a British plot.)
Whelan denied that McGoff's Panax Corporation ever  paid for it, but ex-LaRouchians who worked on it say that top LaRouche aides  told them it was being prepared under contract and that several thousand dollars  was to be paid on delivery.
In 1978 McGoff was named in South African parliamentary hearings as having  received over $1 1 million from Mulder's secret fund.
The money was to buy the  Washington Star and the Sacramento Union and transform them into pro-South  Africa organs.
The plan never panned out, and McGoff came under investigation  by the Justice Department for failing to register as a foreign agent.
(After an  investigation lasting almost a decade, charges were finally brought in 1986, but  the judge dismissed the case, saying the time limit for prosecution had passed.)
The NCLC's most public pro-South Africa effort was the Conference on Industrial  Development of Southern Africa, held in Washington in 1978 under Fusion  Energy Foundation sponsorship.
The conference was an attempt to head off  disinvestment campaigns by offering an alternative strategy of massive  investment in regional development.
The FEF argued that this would create  socioeconomic conditions for the "eventual" abolition of apartheid.
(A former  leading FEF member recalled that his associates, although willing to "court the  Boers," had been too embarrassed to "endorse apartheid openly.")
The  conference speakers included Dr. William van Rensberg, former technical  director of the South African Minerals Bureau and author of South Africa's     Strategic Minerals: Pieces on a Continental Chessboard, published and  distributed in tine United States and Europe witli money from IVIulder's secret  fund, A sprinkling of diplomats and corporate representatives showed up to hear  van Rensberg describe the migrant labor system in South African mines.
"While  one may argue about the morality," he said, "it is not always appreciated [that]  the mines provide these workers with certain basic skills and offer them, in some  instances, their first contact with Western civilization."
A hint that the Pretoria government was appreciative appeared later that year in  To the Point International, a South African newsmagazine.
A full-page article by  the magazine's managing editor paid tribute to LaRouche as an economic  theoretician.
It said he had "access to the thinking and plans of trans-Atlantic  policymakers at the highest levels," and that "his semantics may be off-target but  his message runs true."
In 1979 a South African parliamentary commission  revealed that To the Point International was one of Mulder's secret operations.
Foreign Minister Pik Botha then confirmed that General Hendrik van den Bergh,  the head of BOSS, had arranged the magazine's financing.
Articles and reports prepared by the NCLC Africa file throughout the late 1970s  record its attempts to establish an ideological rapport with the apartheid regime.
One report described a network of South African "humanists" who were said to  share many of LaRouche's views.
The report, prepared by David Cherry, cited  Nicolaas Diederichs, a former South African President, now deceased.
Cherry  claimed to have been in correspondence with Diederichs and warmly praised his  "humanism."
In fact, Diederichs was a leading architect of apartheid and a Nazi  sympathizer during World War II.
Another supposed member of the network was tycoon Anton Rupert, a major  figure in the Broederbond, the Afrikaaner secret society that controlled the ruling  National Party.
Professing to detect traces of a LaRouche-style philosophy in  Rupert's business pep talks.
Cherry praised him for allegedly maintaining the  ethnic purity (no blacks, Jews, or British) of his corporate board.
Cherry also  expressed admiration for a scheme of Rupert and certain West German bankers  to channel massive new investment into South Africa.
(The 1978 FEF conference  was partly an attempt to popularize this scheme.)
The most imaginative of the NCLC reports suggested that white South Africa's  destiny is to bring the blessings of "humanism" to all southern Africa.
It called for  a massive expansion of the notorious contract labor system for purposes of  cultural uplift.
Included were maps of mineral deposits, railroads, and proposed  energy grids for all of southern Africa.
The linchpin of the scheme was to be  South African domination of Mozambique.
The choice of this Marxist nation that  borders on South Africa was explained as necessary for "forcing" contract  laborers "in the appropriate direction."
Domination of Mozambique would create a  "geometry" in accord with which anti-apartheid "terrorist networks" could be  "mopped up."
Strongly implied was that South Africa should invade and occupy     its neighbors.
But tliis plan proved to be too mucli for Dr. van Rensberg.
In a  1979 telephone interview he called the NCLC "a bunch of dangerous crackpots."
Besides, he added, their "maps were all wrong."
NCLC security staff defector Charles Tate says that the NCLC continued its  relationship with the South African government into the mid-1980s.
In 1984, he  says, it received $5,000 to provide an updated report on U.S. anti-apartheid  groups.
Once again, undercover phone calls were made to activists.
Tate says  he personally edited the report, and that the contract was handled through a  "cutout," a commercial research firm in Manhattan.
"It was understood by  everyone involved that the money came from the South African government,"  Tate says.
But was money paid only for research?
That fall the LaRouchians  disrupted a Washington press conference held by seventeen U.S. Catholic  bishops to protest apartheid.
LaRouchian heckling "broke up" the event and  "prevented questioning by genuine reporters," wrote Steve Askin of the National  Catholic Reporter.
In 1985 LaRouche's Schiller Institute actively courted Bishop Desmond Tutu, the  anti-apartheid Nobel Prize winner, who apparently had no idea of just whom he  was dealing with.
New Solidarity boasted that Tutu had endorsed the Schiller  Institute's "Declaration of the Inalienable Rights of Man."
The following February,  EIR reprinted a "historic" speech by South African President P.W. Botha claiming  that apartheid had been abolished.
More obfuscation followed: EIR published an  interview in Durban with Chief Buthelezi, leader of the Zulus, but the commentary  praised Botha and certain high-ranking military figures as "reformers."
Reverting  to its hard line, EIR praised South African "strike aircraft and commandos" for an  attack on African National Congress bases in Zambia, Zimbabwe, and Botswana.
It was the 1 978 co-prosperity plan all over again~a "grand design" by which  South Africa would become the "'Japan' of the African continent."
In spite of the NCLC's ties with South Africa, Guatemala, and the CIA, many  conservatives have suggested that the NCLC might ultimately be a KGB  operation.
Of course the NCLC denies the charges, and of the dozens of NCLC  defectors interviewed for this book, including those who were high up in the  organization, not one believes the NCLC is actually controlled by the KGB, or  even that it is secretly still wedded to Communist ideology.
However, most agree  that the NCLC is capable of opportunistic dealings with governments across the  political spectrum to further LaRouche's financial interests and his drive for  power.
The LaRouchians have acknowledged Soviet contacts on numerous  occasions.
Just as they found it useful to flirt with the Polish government in the  early 1980s, so they found it rewarding to deal with the Soviets for almost ten  years.
The Soviet connection began in 1974, when LaRouche aides met a Soviet UN  mission official, Nikolai Logiunov, who passed them on to Gennady Nicolayevich  Serebreyakov, a KGB officer attached to the mission.
The latter met regularly     with Gus Kalimtgis during 1974-75.
LaRouclie met twice witli Serebreyakov,  once at tine Soviet mission and once at NCLC lieadquarters.
Tine same year tine LaRoucliians met Serebreyakov, tliey founded tine Fusion  Energy Foundation to work among scientists, including tliose engaged in  classified work.
The FEF zeroed in on researchers in plasma physics and fusion  energy, areas with major military applications.
Most of the scientists they called  to pump for information were unaware that the FEF was a cover for the "science  section" of the NCLC intelligence division, A January 1975 internal document  sets forth LaRouche's plan for this elusive unit, which he has almost never  referred to in any subsequent document.
It would report directly to the NCLC's  intelligence director, Criton Zoakos.
Its duties would include forming collaborative  relationships with specialists at the Atomic Energy Commission's "CTR division,  laboratories, universities, and so forth," using the FEF as a "vehicle" when  appropriate.
LaRouche suggested organizing "ad hoc meetings of working  discussion groups" in order to "accelerate the useful exchange of knowledge,"  but urged the science section to be very careful in its handling of these "sensitive  relationships."
In 1 975 a top FEF officer traveled to Moscow, supposedly to attend a scientific  conference.
He was welcomed even though the official line of the Communist  Party USA and the Soviet press was that the CIA controlled the LaRouche  organization.
Meanwhile, LaRouche developed an elaborate espionage  philosophy to provide an alibi for dealing privately with the Soviets.
The NCLC  was the "open channel" through which the KGB could pass "policy-relevant"  information to the CIA, and vice versa.
The NCLC didn't have to tell the CIA  about these meetings; all it had to do was transmit the information over its telex  lines.
The National Security Agency monitored the lines and would automatically  pick it up.
As to anything secret the NCLC might learn from American scientists,  not to worry~the NCLC was totally surrounded by government agents.
Anything  secret it learned would be something planted by the CIA because it wanted the  KGB to get it through the open channel.
Such information would be either  disinformation or "policy-relevant."
Somewhere in this fantasy the idea of guarding national security secrets was  entirely lost.
It became permissible to transmit anything to anybody, because  everything was just a dog and pony show.
When two Soviet spies were arrested  in New Jersey in 1977, New Solidarity declared them to be innocent and claimed  that the NCLC had been dealing with them.
The Soviet spies were not really  spies but "conduits," and one of their "major functions" had been the  "transmission of USLP/NCLC materials" to Moscow.
This wasn't questionable  behavior on the NCLC's part, for the materials had been "prepackaged by  elements of the U.S. intelligence community as part of existing courtesy  arrangements between the Soviet and U.S. intelligence services."
Just why the  Soviet spies were arrested if they were part of a "courtesy" channel was not  made clear.
But it is curious that New Solidarity's extraordinary revelation did not     lead to any trouble with the Justice Department, just as LaRouche's threat that  same year to kill Carter led to no trouble with the Secret Service.
Already the  pattern was establishing itself that LaRouche could fantasize and do whatever he  pleased without any fear of consequences.
An equally suspicious incident was described in a 1981 NCLC internal  memorandum signed by LaRouche security aide Paul Goldstein.
After referring  to a "certain [Soviet] UN contact" and the need for "clear channels into the  Soviets," the memo mentioned trips by FEF scientists to Moscow for "scientific  collaboration."
During one such trip an FEF representative, whom the memo  identified only as "the man without shoes," prepared a ninety-page report for the  Soviets "on the U.S. scientific community."
The Soviets "found the information  given to them quite useful."
Although the memo expressed concern over a  possible "national security problem," it contained a boast that "our open policy  commitment to public cooperation with the Soviets on scientific and related  questions makes our defense nearly airtight."
In fact, there had been several FEF  trips to Moscow following the 1975 opener.
In December 1978, Chuck Stevens,  well known among American fusion scientists for his wide-ranging gossip on  research contracts, promotions, and job changes in the fusion (and later the Star  Wars) community, attended a laser physics conference in Moscow along with  another FEF representative.
On another visit an FEF physicist was given a tour  of the Soviet science complex near Novosibirsk in Siberia~and later gave a slide  show on it at NCLC headquarters.
By the early 1980s LaRouche's scientific intelligence gathering and its possible  Soviet links had become a cause for concern to Generals Keegan and Graham  and the Heritage Foundation.
Keegan warned in a 1984 interview that the  LaRouchians had penetrated "every private and government organization in the  United States" involved in fusion research.
"I have observed with a sense of  mounting shock," he said, "their success in eliciting what I thought was sensitive  information."
John Bosma, editor of Military Space magazine, echoed Keegan's  view.
He said that in 1 981 , when he was on the staff of the House Armed  Services Committee, a LaRouche follower approached him seeking to find out  the Cruise missile's odometer range, a closely guarded military secret.
The LaRouche organization's relationship with the Soviet Union ranged beyond  military and scientific matters.
Former NCLC intelligence staffer Kevin Coogan  writes that in 1979 LaRouche met in West Germany with Julian Semenov, a  Soviet spy novelist widely believed to be linked to the KGB.
Semenov asked the  LaRouchians to investigate the disappearance of a czarist treasure looted by the  Nazis.
The LaRouchians found no treasure, but they did publish an EIR teaser  about it.
They also published an article by Semenov on the Kennedy  assassination.
(Predictably, he speculated that Peking was involved.)
Another  key Soviet contact was loni Andronov, a correspondent for Literaturnaya Gazeta.
Andronov frequently chatted with Paul Goldstein, whom he occasionally quoted  as a counterintelligence expert.
In one interview Goldstein told Andronov he     thought the so-called Bulgarian role in the attempted assassination of Pope John  Paul was a hoax.
On this point he was probably right, but he went on to suggest  that the CIA might have been involved--an allegation for which there is no  evidence whatsoever.
According to Coogan, the LaRouchians met regularly with Soviet officials in  Washington as late as 1983.
The LaRouchians claim they provided reports on  these contacts to Judge Clark's office at the NSC.
Whatever the truth,  LaRouchian publications until the death of Leonid Brezhnev displayed a certain  degree of affection for hard-line Stalinism because of its no-nonsense attitude  toward Zionists and other dissenters and its commitment to central economic  planning.
New Solidarity's obituary on Brezhnev praised him as a "nation builder"  and avoided any mention of his invasions of Czechoslovakia and Afghanistan.
Thereafter, as LaRouche became more heavily involved in supporting Star Wars  and NATO, the NCLC line changed.
Moscow became the "Third Rome," a center  of unremitting Russian Orthodox evil.
When Gorbachev took power, the  LaRouchians said he was the Antichrist.
The Soviets in turn took serious note for the first time of LaRouche's West  European political intrigues.
In the wake of the 1986 assassination of Olof Palme,  the Soviet press depicted the LaRouchians as the prime suspects.
LaRouche  countered that the KGB did it, a charge for which there was no more rhyme or  reason than Goldstein's allegations about the CIA and the Pope.
Meanwhile,  LaRouche claimed that the October 1986 government raid on his headquarters in  Virginia was Soviet-inspired.
According to LaRouche, when Reagan and  Gorbachev met in Iceland, Gorbachev delivered an ultimatum: Either you get rid  of LaRouche or there'll be no arms deal.
In Paris, LaRouche sued the pro-  glasnost SoV\e\ magazine New Times for calling him a "Nazi without the  swastika."
It was basically the same suit he had brought repeatedly without  success in American courts.
The pro-g/asnos^ Soviet magazine chose to play by  Western legal rules: They mounted an aggressive courtroom defense, entering  LaRouche's own writings as evidence.
The Paris High Court rejected LaRouche's  suit and ordered him to pay costs as well as damages to the magazine and its  distributors.
LaRouche often pokes fun at those who would depict him as simply a pawn for  East or West.
"As long as some slow-thinking folk believed that we were CIA,  and some other foolish folk believed that we were KGB, our mere continuing our  own quality of independent intelligence-work kept the game on the field," he  wrote in 1 981 .
But even the most independent-minded ideologue is going to lean  toward one side or the other.
LaRouche's great dream was to rise to power in  America with the support of the right.
It was thus natural that he should put more  effort into courting the CIA than the KGB.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Twenty   The Wooing of Langley     As LaRouche began his swing to tine riglit in tine mid-1970s, a certain degree of  realism entered liis tliinking.
Studying tine failure in America of tiny "sect-like"  storm trooper groups, he stated flatly that no such organization could ever grow  into a "large-scale fascist movement" unless a "leading strata of capitalists and  governmental agencies sponsor and direct such a development."
He soon began  to actively seek such sponsorship.
Still influenced by leftist ideas, he turned to  the agency that all leftists believe is the chief bankroller of anything and  everything fascist: the CIA.
According to documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act, NCLC  members barraged CIA headquarters with phone calls in 1976 offering to provide  briefings on international terrorism.
They asked to speak with the director,  George Bush, and even placed a call to his home.
Commenting on these  overtures, a CIA memo observed that LaRouche had "openly advocated the  overthrow of the U.S. government" only two years previously, but that his  organization appeared to be shifting its public posture "from one of violence to  one reflecting more traditional, democratic values."
The late 1970s were an auspicious time for a private intelligence group aspiring  to work with the government.
The CIA was under a cloud of suspicion in the  wake of Vietnam and Watergate, and had been forced to disband its domestic  intelligence operations.
Congress had quashed its efforts to halt a Marxist  takeover in Angola.
Carter's CIA director.
Admiral Stansfield Turner, had fired  several hundred covert action specialists.
Many professionals were alarmed at  what they believed were gaping holes in the nation's intelligence capabilities.
In 1977 New Solidarity began publishing attacks on Turner and President Carter  for replacing deputy director E. Henry Knoche and firing the old boys.
This  culminated in LaRouche's "The CIA~Only a Caretaker Force," which claimed that  "the once-feared premises at Langley have been degraded to a laundering  agency for British and Israeli intelligence products....British and Zionist agents  generally have the run of the premises....Menachem Begin runs Israel, and  Moshe Dayan runs the United States."
The best solution, he suggested, was for CIA dissidents to put him in the White  House.
"I would pull together an effective overall U.S. intelligence capability  within weeks," he promised.
Just what he meant by an "effective" capability was  already outlined in The Case of Walter Lippmann, his 1977 treatise on the need  for a dictatorship in America.
LaRouche advocated the centralizing of all U.S.     intelligence functions under a single cabinet-level "Secretary for Political  Intelligence."
This super-CIA would be used for "auditing" the entire executive  branch and would operate its own propaganda machine to smash the influence  of the liberal media.
In 1977 the LaRouchians sought out Mitchell Livingston WerBell III, a longtime  CIA contract agent and former arms manufacturer in Powder Springs, Georgia.
"WerBell represented a group of former military and intelligence people, who we  thought were patriotic and, therefore, would be very upset about the kinds of  policies that would be coming about with the Carter-Mondale administration,"  said Jeffrey Steinberg in a 1984 deposition, "I went down and met with him at his  home and for a period of time there was a sort of continuing discussion.
.
.
in which  he was reading and circulating our material...."   Apart from the security staff's hope that WerBell could become a political recruit,  there was a more practical reason to cultivate him: If LaRouche was ever to gain  any acceptance in the intelligence world, he would need a good public relations  man with CIA ties.
For WerBell the mixing of PR and spying was no novelty.
He  had once owned a PR firm in Atlanta, and he claimed to have done PR work as  well as security consulting in the 1950s for Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista.
Ferociously right-wing and formerly involved in many anti-Communist operations,  WerBell was just the man to dampen down the dust cloud of suspicion created by  LaRouche's Marxist past.
In addition, he was the ideal cutout for any future  serious dealings between the NCLC and the CIA.
The latter wouldn't have to risk  embarrassment by dealing with LaRouche directly; everything could be done  through WerBell.
Like the LaRouchians, WerBell had a fondness for grandiose schemes.
In 1966  he became involved in a plot to invade Haiti.
Having trained the invasion force,  he brought CBS-TV to cover the embarkation.
Federal agents swooped down  and arrested the plotters.
Shortly thereafter WerBell obtained a contract with  Papa Doc Duvalier to retrain the Haitian security forces.
In the late 1960s he developed the Sionics silencer, the world's first efficient  machine-gun silencer, which became extremely popular among drug traffickers,  Mafia hit men, and Central American death squads.
Needing start-up capital,  WerBell went to Stewart Mott, the noted philanthropist and antiwar activist.
WerBell told Mott the device could be used as a lawn-mower silencer to fight  noise pollution.
Mott invested a substantial sum.
In 1974 WerBell sold Nevada real estate mogul and Libertarian Party leader Mike  Oliver on a scheme to invade the island of Abaco and declare it independent  from the Bahamas.
It was to become a tax haven run on libertarian principles.
With Oliver's backing, WerBell began to train a handful of mercenaries, and sent  his friend Walt Mackem to the island to organize the trappings of a secessionist  movement.
As with the Haitian scheme, the feds swooped down.
WerBell was     arrested along with his co-conspirators, but the charges against him were  dropped.
WerBell engaged in media self-promotion with the zest of Buffalo Bill Cody.
He  succeeded because, unlike most intelligence professionals, he was willing to  discuss his past.
He befriended the journalist Andrew St. George, who called him  the "Wizard of Whispering Death" and wrote a number of articles about his  exploits.
WerBell also opened up to writer James Hougan, whose bestseller on  the private intelligence business.
Spook, contains many anecdotes about  WerBell.
When his arms business failed, WerBell founded the Cobray International  counterterrorism training school on his sixty-six-acre estate near Powder Springs,  Georgia (called the Farm, after the CIA training center at Camp Peary, Virginia).
He posed in a Scottish kilt on the firing range for The National Enquirer's rival.
The Star, attracted laudatory coverage from Soldier of Fortune magazine, and  gave himself a promotion to lieutenant general in the RFAA (Royal Free Afghan  Army).
In Cobray promotional material, WerBell listed almost two-dozen antiterrorist  operations in which he supposedly had participated since the 1950s.
He told  20/20 that Coca-Cola had hired him to take care of kidnapping threats against its  Argentine executives during the urban terrorist wave in the early 1970s.
He said  he let out the word: "We'll kill you.
We'll go after your wife.
We'll kill her.
We'll go  after your children.
We'll kill them.
Your cats, your dogs, your pigs and your  chickens."
It didn't seem to occur to WerBell that the Argentine terrorists were  upper-middle-class city kids who wouldn't know your pigs and chickens from their  Gucci loafers.
Nevertheless, he claimed there were no more kidnap threats  against Coca-Cola.
If LaRouche and his followers wanted to meet some real live spooks, WerBell  was willing to oblige.
He arranged several meetings that included CIA personnel.
"You're damn right he did~l was there," said Gordon Novel, a New Orleans  private investigator who lived for several months at the Farm in 1977.
Jim  Hougan recalls attending two meetings in an apartment at the Crystal City  Marriott near Washington-referred to as a "safe house" by WerBell-where the  LaRouchians explained their theories about British control of the narcotics traffic  to former and active-duty CIA men.
WerBell invited LaRouche and his top aides down to the Farm to regale them  with stories about Vietnam and introduce them to more spooks.
One of these  contacts was Major General John K. Singlaub (U.S. Army), who had spent a  large portion of his career assigned to CIA covert operations in Asia and had  once been CIA deputy station chief in Seoul.
He first met with them while  stationed in Georgia.
After his retirement in 1978 they showed up at his lectures     around the country and at a ceremony where he and WerBell were given medals  by the Taiwanese government.
Although Singlaub dropped the LaRouchians after learning of their extremism,  some of WerBell's friends were less fastidious.
Ex-CIA agent Mackem advised  them on the international drug traffic in 1978 while they were writing Dope, Inc.,  and continued to help them off and on.
By 1 986 they were paying him over  $1,000 a month.
WerBell was a Liberty Lobby member and close friend of Willis Carto.
His  political views were thus in the same ballpark as LaRouche's on many questions.
NCLC defectors recalled sessions where the two would chat away like old OSS  cronies.
(Although LaRouche had not served in the OSS, he had been a medic in  Burma briefly near the end of the war.)
Out of these conversations emerged a  scheme as bold as the Abaco Revolution.
In February 1979, LaRouche--once  again decrying Admiral Turner's cutbacks at Langley-issued a call for "an  outpouring of financial and political support" to establish a private intelligence  organization to fill the vacuum created by the housecleaning at the CIA.
"What we propose," LaRouche said, "is a de facto augmentation of the resources  of the [NCLC], thereby combining the core contribution to be made by the [NCLC]  with the resources otherwise befitting a U.S. government intelligence service."
He  went on: "Such an agency, endowed by corporate.
.
.
and other private sources,  would immediately rehire those patriotic, trained former operatives of the CIA and  related official agencies purged through British influence."
LaRouche suggested  in a follow-up article that certain trade unions (e.g., the Teamsters) should help  finance this shadow CIA.
The idea of finding private sponsors for LaRouche's intelligence operation was  shrewd.
Some Teamster officials responded right away.
But the proposal to  merge the LaRouchians and various covert action veterans into a single  organization was simply not workable.
LaRouche's intellectualism didn't appeal to  those who inclined toward traditional rightist groups.
The Bay of Pigs veterans in  Florida were interested in cocaine, not a coup d'etat.
The rogue element among  the old boys was preoccupied with laundering heroin money or smuggling arms.
Essentially this left LaRouche on his own~and with a problem galling to his  vanity.
The NCLC had impressive research capabilities, a telex network, a  computer, and even a war room.
But it lacked the crowning touch: its own "A-  Team."
LaRouche had learned during Operation Mop Up that most of his  followers were klutzes, good only for ganging up on elderly Communist Party  members.
Even the toughest of his security staff were former college athletes  with no military experience.
WerBell had a solution.
Members of the security staff began trickling down to the  Farm for a ten-day course (at $2,000 each) in "counterterrorism."
New Solidarity     boasted this was a "pilot project" for units to be attaclied to corporations and tine  Teamsters.
WerBell, in a 1979 teleplione interview, said it was simply training in  "martial arts, pistol shooting, paramedical skills, the use of shotguns, rifle  countersniper activity, countersurveillance, and the control of three-car  caravans."
According to former NCLC members, the results were not very impressive.
Although scores of LaRouchians took the training, followed by karate classes in  New York, LaRouche himself had little confidence in them.
For his personal  security needs, he brought in professional bodyguards and moonlighting police  officers.
Nevertheless, the WerBell training provided a deep psychological  satisfaction for LaRouche's followers.
Here they were, pipe-smoking intellectuals  hanging out with the world's deadliest anti-Communist he-men.
First there was  the "general" himself, adviser to death squads and owner of the world's largest  private stockpile of automatic weapons.
Then there was Colonel Drexel B.  ("Barney") Cochran (USAF, ret.)
, a former unconventional warfare expert for the  Joint Chiefs of Staff, who taught classes at the Farm on how to defend oneself  using a hatchet or a ballpoint pen.
Next came Bert Waldron, a sniper instructor  with 113 confirmed kills in Vietnam, and Jason Lau, the resident martial-arts  master whose "incredible expertise" (according to Eagle magazine) enabled him  "to walk.
.
.
across ceilings like a human fly, remain crouched in a motionless  position for hours while waiting for his prey, jump higher than people's heads;  and pause, bird-like, suspended in the air."
It is possible there was more than meets the eye in all this, and that WerBell was  psyching out the LaRouchians for the CIA to see if they could become useful in  some form.
If so, nothing would have been better than to put them through a boot  camp while keeping LaRouche well supplied with bourbon and ice on the porch.
When 20/20 did its report on WerBell in 1979, it included footage of LaRouche's  followers undergoing training.
It also included an interview with General Singlaub,  who said: "In every place where Mitch has operated it's . . . been either as a  contract employee or with the knowledge of the local CIA, even if they couldn't  officially support it."
He added that WerBell specialized in handling situations  where "to try to get this through the Congress, to try to get this through the  approval of the American people, would be almost impossible."
Whatever his motives, WerBell began to exert great personal influence over the  NCLC security staff.
"I'm very fond of some of them," he told me in 1 979.
"They're smart as hell."
Jeff Steinberg chatted on the phone with him almost  daily.
It became a sign of status within the NCLC to have met "Mitch" and taken  the training in Powder Springs.
However, the NCLC leadership also invoked his  name in a vaguely menacing manner to keep members of the national office staff  in line.
One member, after dropping out, walked around for weeks worrying he'd  be cut down by a silenced machine gun.
At the outset WerBell learned that being LaRouche's handler could be a nerve-  wracking job.
LaRouche was persuaded in August 1977 that German terrorists  were out to kill him.
WerBell sent a Powder Springs police officer, Larry Cooper,  to Wiesbaden to reorganize LaRouche's personal security.
Cooper sat in on a  political discussion with LaRouche and several top NCLC members during which  LaRouche suddenly brought up the idea of assassinating President Carter,  National Security Adviser Zbigniew Brzezinski, NATO general secretary Joseph  Luns, and David Rockefeller.
It could be done, LaRouche argued, with remote-  controlled radio bombs activated from public pay phones.
WerBell had told Cooper that guarding LaRouche was a CIA contract job, and  that Cooper therefore would be serving his country.
But Cooper now realized that  WerBell had not told him the entire truth.
He called the Farm in a panic, and said  he was coming home on the next flight and contacting the FBI.
Gordon Novel  was in the room with WerBell, and recalls that "the general went through the  ceiling, immediately started calling Washington and canceling a lot of things and  generated a kind of propaganda story, a cover story, to completely suppress the  affair."
Indeed, WerBell had cause for worry~his name had been connected with  a radio-bomb assassination scheme once before: During the Nixon  administration he had worked with a secret Drug Enforcement Administration unit  under Lucien ("Black Luigi") Conein that had planned to assassinate Latin  American drug dealers.
As a consultant, he had devised remote-control bombs  and had provided a business cover for Conein's unit.
The plan was scotched  when Senator Lowell Weicker found out about it and called hearings.
WerBell  refused to answer questions before the committee, earning the nickname "Mitch  the Fifth" in right-wing circles.
Apparently LaRouche had taken this incident and  transmuted it in his own spy novel-saturated imagination into something that  could land them both in deep trouble.
WerBell decided he'd better get LaRouche into a "reality state" fast or there'd  never be an "accommodation between the CIA and LaRouche," Novel said.
Shortly afterward.
Novel had a falling-out with WerBell and left Powder Springs,  He says he told the FBI about the Wiesbaden incident, but they showed no  interest.
This was a curious apathy indeed: If a leader of a Communist group or  the Ku Klux Klan had discussed an assassination scheme in the presence of a  law enforcement officer, as LaRouche had done, the government no doubt would  have reacted instantly.
The LaRouchians kept their White House press passes  with Secret Service clearance.
In 1984 Pat Lynch of NBC contacted Zbigniew  Brzezinski about the incident; the answer from his office was "no comment."
The loose talk continued with impunity.
According to a report prepared by former  security staffers for The New York Times, a LaRouche aide briefed the national  office staff in May 1979 on a plan for "selective assassination" of opponents.
EIR  later reported that an anonymous astrologer had named thirteen enemies of the  NCLC who might die "within hours" of strokes and heart attacks if LaRouche was  ever the victim of assassination or attempted assassination.
WerBell learned that one key to handling LaRouche was to provide him with  illusory trappings of power.
During his 1980 presidential campaign LaRouche  was conveyed from the Atlanta airport to the Farm in a rented helicopter.
Upon  landing, he was warmly greeted by WerBell and some good old boys for the  benefit of local Atlanta TV.
They did all but play "Hail to the Chief."
WerBell also  provided guards for campaign events as a compensation for the Secret Service  protection that LaRouche had been denied.
But even when LaRouche was being  manipulated on the psychological level, he somehow always manipulated right  back on a level that really counts: His checks to WerBell began to bounce, and  the Dooley Helicopter Company, whose services had been solicited using  WerBell's name, went unpaid.
WerBell dashed off a letter to LaRouche, together  with a draft of a press statement that he threatened to release if LaRouche didn't  pay up.
"It is incredulous," WerBell wrote, "that an individual endeavoring to  manage the economics and resources of a [Platonic] Republic is unable to cope  with the finances of a small staff."
WerBell's importance within the LaRouche universe seemed to decline in the  early 1 980s, as the LaRouchians found other intermediaries for their intelligence  community dealings.
WerBell was suffering from cancer, and he and LaRouche  continued to quarrel over unpaid bills.
But when he died in December 1985,  LaRouche penned an unctuous obituary saying that he owed his life to WerBell--  a reference to the assassination plots his adviser had supposedly foiled.
LaRouche's efforts to cultivate ex-spooks, part-time spooks, private spooks, and  even imaginary spooks reached an extraordinary range of people in the late  1970s and early 1980s.
He met with former CIA director William Colby but failed  to impress him.
His followers befriended CIA deputy director Ray Cline, a  research fellow at Georgetown University's Center for International Strategic  Studies, and persuaded him to meet with LaRouche, Cline continued to chat with  them throughout the early 1980s.
An especially prized contact was former CIA  counterintelligence chief James Angleton, who granted a series of interviews to a  security staffer.
Defectors recall Jeffrey Steinberg shouting to an underling in the  midst of an office crisis in the late 1970s: "Quick!
Go brief Angleton!"
(The  LaRouchians eventually turned on both Cline and Angleton, accusing the former  of "genocide" and the latter of plotting against them.)
The nets were spread as widely as possible.
LaRouche followers set up a  literature table at a conference of the Association of Former Intelligence Officers  (AFIO).
They sent out a "Dear OSS Veteran" letter soliciting subscriptions to  Executive Intelligence Review.
They called former agents at home, asking them  to sign Schiller Institute petitions, run for public office as beam weapons  candidates, and donate money to save the NATO alliance.
In 1984 Lieutenant  Colonel Louis H. Atkins (U.S. Army, ret.)
, who had served in the CIA during the  Korean War and was listed on the AFIO roster, was contacted at his home,  Atkins listened politely, but when they importuned him for money and used his     name on a list of endorsers without liis permission, lie became fed up.
"I called  the FBI," he said.
In the early years of the Reagan administration the LaRouchians established  direct channels into the intelligence community.
Admiral Inman appreciated their  "flow of materials" to help fill the gap left by Turner's cutbacks.
LaRouche was  allowed to brief two aides to John McMahon, Inman's successor, at CIA  headquarters in 1983.
According to court papers, an aide to Federal Emergency  Management Agency director Louis Guiffrida frequently met with the  LaRouchians and even came to NCLC headquarters for a day's briefing.
Jeffrey  Steinberg visited the National Security Council eight to ten times between June  1983 and June 1984, according to his deposition in LaRouche v. NBC.
Articles in  EIR were peppered with quotes from unnamed "CIA Sovietologists" and "DIA  analysts."
LaRouche's science adviser.
Dr. Steven Bardwell, became convinced that the  NCLC top leadership was prostituting itself to the CIA and the Reagan  administration.
Being himself a participant in several meetings with NSC staff  members, he wrote an internal document sharply criticizing this trend shortly  before his defection in early 1984.
"At the point, nine months ago, that Reagan  adopted an approximation of our policy [on beam weapons], our NSA/CIA/DIA  'connections' acquired a powerful hold over us," he complained.
"We now began  to bend our polemics, public statements, intelligence tasks, and terms of  reference to suit our newly acquired clients."
The capstone of the new policy was the hiring of ex-Pentagon spooks and self-  styled CIA operatives who claimed to have special high-level sources.
NCLC  security staff reports circa 1984 contain numerous references to "the Major," a  code name for Anthony W. ("Danny") Murdock, a former Army Special Forces  officer who worked from 1976 to 1982 as a civilian foreign intelligence specialist  at the Army's Aberdeen Proving Grounds in Maryland.
Murdock provided the  LaRouchians with frequent security advice after leaving government service.
According to Virginia law enforcement sources, he accompanied Jeffrey  Steinberg on fact-finding trips to Guatemala.
A June 1986 internal LaRouche  memorandum says that Murdock received $3,000 a month in consulting fees and  loans of tens of thousands of dollars, including a $12,000 loan that month.
In 1984 Murdock joined with Steinberg and Paul Goldstein to form a real estate  partnership, Dan Bar Unlimited.
(The "Bar" was Barney Cochran, who soon  dropped out.)
They purchased 4,500 acres of timber and farmland in Pulaski  County, Virginia, and set up a firing range.
According to Virginia authorities,  paramilitary training for LaRouche security aides was conducted there beginning  in 1984.
A Vietnam veteran who lives nearby observed people in camouflage  suits, their faces blackened "like for a recon assignment," training in a field.
"I  heard bursts of rapid fire, like an AR-15 on full automatic," he said.
Another  neighbor recalled frequent helicopter landings.
Murdock had built a perimeter     road around the farm and up to the top of the mountain, which was patrolled by  jeep.
The neighbors say that every Thursday night there would be a light on top  of the mountain and a low-flying plane would come over, A 1986 LaRouchian  memo mentioned transactions by courier totaling over $230,000 for the farm's  expenses.
The memo said these payments were being listed as "legal  investigations," but warned this might not prove a very defensible position with  the IRS.
In 1987 court-appointed trustees seized the farm in partial payment of  millions of dollars in fines levied on the LaRouchians because of their failure to  comply with federal grand jury subpoenas.
By the mid-1980s the LaRouchians had over a dozen security-type consultants  on their payroll, but the most assiduous were three men from Reading,  Pennsylvania, who affected knowledge of vast intrigues.
One said he was a CIA  official and used a code name.
The other two were known to the LaRouchians  under their real names but claimed to be the cutouts for mysterious high-up  people.
Their ringleader was a man almost as brilliantly devious as LaRouche-  Roy Everett Frankhouser.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Twenty-one  Night Riders to the Rescue     Roy Frankhouser is a roly-poly cigar-chomping little man with a glass eye and a  taste for loud sport jackets.
For much of his adult life he has lived with his mother  in Reading, Pennsylvania.
His late stepfather was a private detective, for whom  Roy worked in the early 1 960s.
After that he usually worked as a department  store salesman.
Genial and polite, he is a difficult person not to like.
He could be  an officer of the local Rotary Club and a pillar of the community.
But Roy turns nasty in the twinkling of an eye.
He has a recorded message on  his telephone, which he changes every week.
In early 1988 the messages were  about Jesus Christ and the forgiveness of sins.
But Roy was feeling the pressure  from his financial and legal difficulties.
The message changed to a shrill call for  local Aryans to join the "Reading Night Riders."
The Zionists, he said, are the  "sons of Lucifer."
It's time to send them "to the rope and telephone pole."
It's time  for a "Final Solution.
.
.
a real solution for treason," and concluding: "You can smell  the gas, can't you?"
Born in 1939, Roy has belonged at one time or another since his high school  years to most of the important white supremacist groups~the United Klans of  America, the American Nazi Party, the Minutemen, the National Renaissance  Party, the Liberty Lobby, the White Citizens Councils, the National States Rights  Party.
For years he was the Grand Dragon of the Pennsylvania Klan.
He took the  Fifth Amendment over thirty times during a 1966 congressional investigation of  the Klan.
In 1972 he demonstrated on Manhattan's Fifth Avenue in a National  Renaissance Party storm trooper uniform to challenge a state law against  wearing Nazi garb in public.
In his youth Roy participated in numerous cross burnings and street rallies and  was arrested over two dozen times.
He stockpiled guns and ammunition, and  once ran a paramilitary training camp to prepare for the coming race war.
He lost  his eye in a 1965 bar room brawl.
The American Nazi Party claimed a "Jew  gang" did it.
Roy sometimes claims it's a Bay of Pigs battle wound.
He operates the Mountain Church of Jesus Christ in a run-down Reading  neighborhood, and lists it as his official residence.
Some folks believe the electric  cross in front is a Klan symbol.
The church is the local arm of the Mountain  Church in Cohoctah, Michigan, a neo-gnostic Identity church whose pastor is  Robert Miles, one of Roy's closest "racial comrades" and a LaRouche ally for  many years.
("Mountain" stands for Mont Segur, the medieval fortress of the  gnostic Cathars in southern France.)
In the late 1960s some of Roy's comrades began to suspect he was an FBI  snitch.
Roy says the FBI started the rumor as part of a plot to instigate his  assassination.
But in 1 972 Roy did become an informer for the Alcohol, Tobacco,  and Firearms Bureau's Reading office, using the code name "Ronnie."
Special  agent Edward Slamon, Roy's controller, reported to superiors that Roy had  solemnly promised to sever "all relationships with other federal enforcement  agencies" and work exclusively for the ATF.
"This point was dwelled on and  explored at length," Slamon wrote.
"I informed Ronnie that at any time... I  determined that he was dealing with any other agency and supplying them with  the same information, our bargain was null and void."
Roy told Slamon that a Black September cell in Toronto was planning attacks on  prominent American Jews.
Earlier information from Roy had checked out, and  the ATF asked the National Security Council in the White House for approval to  send him to Toronto.
John Caulfield, the ATF's assistant director for enforcement,  obtained the go-ahead, and Roy thus embarked on his very brief career as a  foreign agent.
His reports of his Toronto adventures, as reflected in Slamon's own reports to  superiors, suggest that the Black September cell, if indeed it existed, was  composed of the world's most indiscreet terrorists.
Barely acquainted with Roy,  they were supposedly willing to tell him everything.
Roy claimed to have picked  the brains of one cell leader while they strolled around the city "visiting museums  and public places."
Roy said the cell was planning skyjackings and kidnappings  with the help of Quebec nationalist bomb technicians and Czech diplomats.
Roy  was supposed to recruit a bush pilot to pick up ransom money, and also was  assigned to "keep track of all visitors from Israel to America."
The ATF finally  became suspicious.
Slamon met with Roy and asked him if he would be willing to  return to Canada and discuss his story with the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
Roy "became visibly upset and agitated," Slamon wrote, and flatly refused,  apparently knowing that the RCMP would see through his deception.
While working for the ATF, Roy seems to have tried to help out his friend and  fellow Grand Dragon Bob Miles, who was facing a long prison sentence for  masterminding the 1971 Pontiac, Michigan, school bus bombings to protest  integration.
Miles would serve six years in Marion for this crime, but at the time of  Roy's ATF employment he was free pending the outcome of an appeal.
Roy  brought Slamon tapes of conversations with Miles and offered to set up a crony  of Miles for a "controlled buy" of stolen explosives.
Although Roy's maneuverings  during this period are extremely murky, the best bet is that he was fishing for  information about the Miles case and trying to compromise the feds so Miles  could charge federal misconduct.
Miles himself certainly believes this.
He told  journalist Martin Lee in 1986 that Roy "never really threw any right-wingers to the  wolves" and that Roy was beaten up by ATF agents in reprisal.
Roy says that he  was indeed a double agent for the racialist cause, and that he was beaten by a  motorcycle gang in Berks County Prison at ATF instigation.
Roy landed in prison because, after tine ATF rejected liis plan for a controlled  buy, he went ahead on his own with a real buy.
In February 1974 he was  arrested and charged with "aiding and abetting" the transportation of 240 pounds  of stolen explosives to Michigan.
At this point, the ATF washed its hands of Roy.
His bail was set at $50,000, and he spent several months in prison before he  could raise the money.
Finally out on bail and awaiting trial, Roy encountered members of the Reading  NCLC as they sold New Solidarity.
They had only just begun their swing to the  right, and interaction was difficult at first.
But Roy knew how to ingratiate himself  with leftists from his experience infiltrating Socialist Workers Party meetings in  New York in the early 1960s.
(He claims he first met LaRouche then, but  LaRouche denies it.)
Roy was helped in approaching the NCLC by neo-Nazi  occultist Ken Duggan, who introduced him to security staffer Scott Thompson in  New York.
Regarding his indictment, Roy told the LaRouchians he was an honest,  dedicated government agent who had risked his life in the war on gunrunners,  drug traffickers, and terrorists.
He was being "hung out to dry" by the intelligence  community because he knew too much about local cover-ups and corruption.
The LaRouchians put him through an intensive grilling, and he thoroughly  convinced them.
They issued broadsides in his defense and sponsored a well-  attended press conference at which he made numerous detailed allegations  about unlawful activities by federal agents in the Reading area {for instance,  directing him to commit burglaries and secretly tape conversations between the  Pontiac defendants and their attorney).
"My partner in crime was Uncle Sam," he  said.
In a press statement aimed more at the NCLC than at the media, Roy claimed  that while working for the ATF he had really been working for the CIA.
He had  been a CIA agent ever since the Bay of Pigs.
He had perused a top secret White  House Committee of 40 report.
He had been drugged and brainwashed in Berks  County Prison.
Roy's account of his brainwashing was remarkably similar to  LaRouche's account the previous year of Chris White's alleged ordeal: "strapped  in a medical chair," "a sensation of receding into a tunnel," "an overwhelming  sense of drowning," a lingering "disassociation reaction."
At Roy's trial, retired agent Slamon testified for three days.
His account of the  NSC-approved Toronto caper stimulated press attention, and Roy was glad to  oblige with more details.
The upshot was a deal whereby he pleaded guilty to  trafficking in explosives and was given five years' probation, although he had  originally faced a possible fifty-one years in prison.
A Reading police official told  me years later that he believed the intelligence community had intervened.
Roy's maneuverings during the trial apparently made a deep impression on the  LaRouchians.
He had shown that if you can get government agents to meet with     you and give you money, then no matter what you do later, you can tell the court  you were doing it for the feds.
And if you happen to have observed any  improprieties while working for the feds, you can use that for leverage.
The  LaRouchians would use similar tactics in Boston thirteen years later.
After the trial, Roy began to spend more and more time with the "comrades," as  he called the LaRouchians, He exchanged information with NCLC security chiefs  Jeffrey Steinberg and Paul Goldstein almost daily on the phone.
He traveled to  New York at NCLC expense on security assignments.
While staying at the  homes of Jewish members he was the perfect gentleman, never displaying any  bigotry.
For Roy, it was just one more manipulative relationship--to get money out  of the LaRouchians and to persuade them to take political stances that would  serve the fight against the pro-Zionist establishment.
Roy chiefly fascinated the LaRouchians because of his alleged intelligence  community ties.
When they indicated that they too wanted to hobnob with secret  agents, he set about facilitating it to the mutual advantage of himself and various  third parties.
It was Roy who first suggested that the LaRouchians should link up  with Mitch WerBell.
Claiming to have worked with WerBell on CIA assignments,  Roy helped them compile a detailed dossier on him.
At the time WerBell was in  trouble with the ATF and strapped for cash.
His son, Mitch IV, had been arrested  on charges of trying to illegally sell machine guns to an undercover agent.
Although the charges against Mitch IV were dropped, the ATF forced WerBell out  of the armaments business because of improprieties in his record keeping.
An  NCLC dossier suggested that the Rockefeller family and Interpol were behind  this: "Roy believes that if we can pin down how the operation is being run against  WerBell there is a possibility.
.
.
he can be turned."
Months passed, yet no deal between LaRouche and WerBell was finalized, and it  was time to prime the pump.
When LaRouche went to Wiesbaden in the summer  of 1977, Roy sent a warning from "Mister Ed" (an alleged mysterious personage  whom Roy said was linked to the highest levels of the CIA) that LaRouche might  be in danger from terrorists.
In previous months there had been several highly  publicized terrorist assassinations and kidnappings in West Germany.
On July 31  a band of anarchists linked to the Baader-Meinhof gang gunned down Jurgen  Ponto, a banker much admired by LaRouche.
Shortly before 5 A.M. on August 1 ,  LaRouche received a transatlantic phone call from Roy, passing on an  emergency message from Mister Ed: A hit list had been found in a terrorist safe  house, and LaRouche's name supposedly was included.
LaRouche panicked.
In  a news release later that day he announced the threat to his life.
He did not  specify the source, merely saying that it was "relayed.
.
.
from high-level sources of  the best qualifications."
LaRouche immediately agreed to hire WerBell as his  security adviser.
Roy's role as the cutout for Mister Ed became the centerpiece of his dealing with  the LaRouchians.
Mister Ed supposedly had asked him to open the channel     because LaRouche's knowledge of terrorism had impressed many important  people, including George Bush.
(Roy knew the LaRouchians had called Bush's  home in an attempt to brief him on terrorism.)
Roy said that Mister Ed would be  requesting reports from LaRouche on various questions which would be  transmitted to the highest levels of the CIA and the White House.
Roy was  careful not to neglect Steinberg and Goldstein, He said Mister Ed had assigned  them the code names "Purple Haze" and "Honeywell."
Over a seven-year period Roy delivered to the LaRouchians dozens of "E to L"  (Ed to LaRouche) memos.
A typical memo included advice that LaRouche should  try to work with Colonel Gaddafi, who supposedly was getting a raw deal from  Zionist elements in the U.S. government and thus was being driven, against his  will, into the Soviet camp.
Roy also transmitted numerous verbal messages.
LaRouche prepared the intelligence evaluations as requested, and his followers  carried out the propaganda "assignments" suggested by Mister Ed.
These  assignments were often anti-Zionist, as when Roy told the LaRouchians that  Mister Ed wanted them to spread the word that Israel had the A-bomb and was  the main threat to world peace.
Someone claiming to be Mister Ed also began to  communicate directly with Paul Goldstein.
Former NCLC members recall him  rushing out of the office on West Fifty-eighth Street in Manhattan to answer the  celestial ring at a street pay phone.
The identity of Mister Ed became a subject of endless speculation.
Defectors  from the security staff stated in a report prepared in 1979 for The New York  Times that they believed he was former CIA deputy director E. Henry Knoche,  whose 1977 firing by Admiral Turner had been denounced by LaRouche.
The  LaRouche leadership also claimed Knoche was Mister Ed in 1987 court  documents.
Knoche in a 1988 telephone interview denied ever meeting Roy or  LaRouche or anyone that he was aware had any connection to them.
"If I thought  I was ever duped into dealing with those people I'd commit hara-kiri on the front  porch," he said.
Referring to LaRouche's trial, he added: "I hope they nail him."
Among journalists.
Mister Ed became one of those unsolved puzzles-something  like the tramps on the grassy knoll in Dallas.
Lou Wolf, editor of Covert Action  magazine, thought Mister Ed was "someone in Angleton's shop."
Kevin Coogan  argued that it was CIA renegade Ed Wilson, who was known in Libya as Mister  Ed and held political views remarkably similar to those expressed in some of the  E to L memos.
Detroit journalist Russ Bellant thought it might have been one of  Wilson's former superiors.
In the mid-1980s the LaRouchians mocked such  speculation with an advertisement in their publications for "Mr. Ed's Elephant  Farm"~a Pennsylvania tourist trap-with a drawing of a charging elephant,  presumably a rogue.
Some cynics theorized that Mister Ed was simply Roy.
But the E to L memos,  although anti-Zionist and extremely right-wing, displayed a conceptual grasp of  international politics beyond anything Roy would have written on his own.
This     anomaly was explained, at least in part, by former associates of Roy who  testified in court that the memos had been plagiarized from defense and foreign  policy journals.
Nevertheless, Roy claims there were a number of people-fifteen  of them--who used the Mister Ed channel.
Although Roy's word alone is dubious  evidence, it makes sense that someone in the zany world of ex-spooks, contract  spooks, and private spooks would have linked up with Roy (who did have  contacts in that milieu) to milk the LaRouchians.
After all, here was a multimillion-  dollar international intelligence and propaganda network just begging to be used  by anyone claiming to be from the CIA.
In their eagerness to be accepted in the  spy world, the LaRouchians would prepare massive dossiers at the drop of a hat,  and publish the most outrageous disinformation and slander in EIR~as long as  they believed the request was coming from "down the way" (i.e., from Langley).
Apparently word of this circulated, and various people on the far right decided to  use the channel to unleash the LaRouchians on personal or political enemies~or  simply to get a free dossier.
There was little risk of exposure or embarrassment.
Roy would take care of all direct dealings with the LaRouchians.
And he himself  had such a bizarre history that no one would believe him if he decided to expose  the operation.
For years Roy's personal prestige with the LaRouchians was tied to his role as  Mister Ed's messenger boy.
If the LaRouchians wanted to talk directly with a real  spook, they went to someone like WerBell.
But after WerBell's health declined,  Roy had his chance to emerge as a full-fledged security guru.
He did not  accomplish this overnight.
In 1982, when LaRouche was living in a Manhattan  town house on Sutton Place, Roy was brought in merely to provide backup  security under his code name "Clay."
Phil Perlonga, a retired New York City  police officer, was working at the time for Metro Security, a professional firm  hired by LaRouche.
Perlonga recalled how Roy gave the Metro men KKK belt  buckles as gifts.
But Perlonga became annoyed when Roy tried to interfere in his  work.
Roy once took charge of whisking Lyn and Helga LaRouche out of a  meeting.
"He ran them into a locked door," Perlonga said.
Roy needed a sidekick with the physical presence and at least part of the  expertise he lacked.
He rekindled his acquaintance with Lee Pick, a Reading  security guard who had been active on the far right.
Pick had served in the  Marines, mostly as an MP in California.
When approached by Roy, he was  unemployed and had a wife and children to support.
He agreed to go to work for  LaRouche as Roy's assistant, and Roy presented him to the security staff as an  experienced operative.
For Pick it was a chance to play James Bond for $500 a week.
He drove  LaRouche's armored Pontiac Bonneville limousine, accompanied him to a  meeting at CIA headquarters, and became the object of amorous advances from  one of Helga's German Amazons.
He and Roy cadged a free trip to Europe on  the Queen Elizabeth II to overhaul LaRouche's security in Wiesbaden.
Traveling  on to Rome, they told the LaRouchians they would meet with the CIA station     chief to arrange security for a LaRouclie conference.
"Tine IVIediterranean climate  offered us seven days of springlike weather which added great comfort to our  tour," reported an unsigned article in Dragonfire, a rightist newsletter published  by Pick.
When asked about Roy in a 1984 deposition, LaRouche described him as "an  expert in security matters.
.
.
he knows certain nasty people by sight or  reputation...." LaRouche praised Roy's ability to keep his "pair of eyes" alert (so  much for LaRouche's own powers of observation) and to "detect nasties by their  wiggle."
Roy's standing became even higher with the security staff.
Steinberg  and Goldstein marveled at his never-ending revelations from high-level sources  inside the FBI, the CIA, the New York Police Department, and NBC-TV.
There was a good reason for Roy's success as a secret agent: He was making  up most of it.
"It was bullshit," Pick said.
"Roy would make up a source A, then a  source B, C and D. I'd be sitting right beside him while he did it."
Internal reports  from LaRouche's security staff in 1984 confirmed Pick's story.
They quote Roy as  providing information from an alleged source inside NBC during its preparation of  a Pirst Camera report on LaRouche.
The allegations pertain to incidents that the  show's producer, Patricia Lynch, says never took place.
The LaRouchians asked Roy and Pick to provide them with a direct CIA channel  in Reading.
The two complied by introducing Paul Goldstein to "Nat" at a  Reading motel.
"Nat," a.k.a. "Nat Regnew," a.k.a. "Mister Nat," a.k.a. "N," was  supposed to be Roy's control officer, a CIA covert operations specialist holding  GS-1 5 or GS-1 6 rank.
After Nat met with LaRouche, a flow of "N to L" memos  began.
Alas, Nat was just a neighbor of Roy's, actually named Monroe Wenger,  who worked on an Army Corps of Engineers dredging barge.
When the  LaRouchians found this out years later, they naturally said the barge was a spy  ship.
Meanwhile Roy and Pick began to supplement these memos and the E to L  memos with weekly "COMSTA-C" reports from an alleged high official, much  higher than Nat, called "the Source."
Whatever the truth regarding Mister Ed, the  provenance of the Source is known: Roy dictated the reports to Pick, making  them up as he went along.
Pick then took them to a local copy center in Reading  to be typed.
Some high-level NCLC members, although not aware of the full depths of the  deception, sensed that something was wrong, not just with Roy but also with  Murdock and all the other security consultants.
Steven Bardwell noted in his pre-  resignation letter that the NCLC's "susceptibility to any information presented in  clandestine form through a covert (or apparently covert) source is a serious  vulnerability.
The amount of garbage we have retailed because it came from  'down the way' is quite remarkable."
But this was a minority view.
Most of the     leadership believed that LaRouche had deep influence at Langley and that the  Source was someone incredibly powerful.
Because they believed this, they decided they must be invulnerable to  prosecution.
Their real if limited success in gaining meetings with CIA and NSC  officials helped to feed this view, but it also was stimulated by phony reports from  consultants, such as the following from early 1984: "LaRouche['s] prestige [is]  highest ever on economy and terrorism.
White House collective view is we can  no longer ignore LaRouche....LaRouche is now magnet for anti-Kissinger forces."
In addition, the COMSTA-C reports provided apparent evidence, week after  week, that LaRouche had friends and sympathizers in the highest places.
Only a  few NCLC leaders ever viewed the COMSTA-C reports, but the general belief  that LaRouche had powerful allies trickled down to the rank and file.
In 1984 the  NCLC's fund-raising methods became wildly reckless, and many fund raisers and  security staffers seemed to have no fear of the law.
They ran the risk of  indictment because they believed there was no risk.
Pick realized things were getting out of hand in the summer of 1984, when  Goldstein approached him and Roy with a deadly proposition.
As Pick later  described it to NBC Nightly News, Goldstein's idea was "that we.
.
.
go along with  him and kill or assassinate Henry Kissinger."
According to Pick, Goldstein said he  knew where Kissinger parked his car in an underground garage, and that it would  be "a relatively easy thing for us to do, to make a bomb, and strap it to his car."
Although Goldstein was probably just trying to impress them, the proposal  unnerved Pick, and it apparently also worried Roy.
Shortly afterward, I received a  series of phone calls from Roy, posing as "Special Agent Phillips" of an unnamed  federal agency.
The calls were intended to interest me in investigating Goldstein.
Roy did not mention the plot against Kissinger, but he did say Goldstein was a  menace who must be stopped.
He said his own hands "were tied," but if I would  write an article on Goldstein or communicate Phillips's information to the federal  prosecutor's office in Boston, then it could help to avert serious criminal acts.
In the fall of 1 984 a federal grand jury was convened in Boston to probe  allegations of LaRouchian credit-card fraud.
LaRouche ordered Roy and Pick to  go to Boston and conduct a counterinvestigation.
Instead, they went to a Star  Trek convention in Scranton, although Roy called the security office and warned  them there were "feds all over" in Boston.
Jeffrey and Michelle Steinberg then  asked Roy and Pick to contact E. Henry Knoche (whom they believed to be  Mister Ed) and get him to "quash" or "fix" the investigation.
How this was to be  done, the Steinbergs weren't clear.
But they felt the "cookie factory" (the CIA)  owed them for their loyal services through the years.
Pick's response was that if  the CIA wouldn't go to the wall for Richard Nixon, it was unlikely to do so for  LaRouche.
Still the security staff believed the Boston investigation was an  isolated and easily containable probe conducted by Kissinger-influenced PBI  chumps.
According to Pederal authorities, the Steinbergs and other security     staffers set about destroying records and arranging for NCLC members wlio  miglit be subpoenaed to move to Europe--to liide out, as IVIiclielle put it, "wliere  tine sun doesn't sliine."
Roy encouraged tliese efforts to obstruct tine grand jury's work.
In a memo to  LaRouclie lie commented on tine fact tliat "paper burns at 451 degrees  Falirenlieit."
Pick wanted no part of tliis, and stopped working witli Roy.
Briefly he  continued to do bodyguard work for LaRouche under the auspices of a New York  private detective agency, but he still felt uneasy.
He met with NBC's Patricia  Lynch and then appeared on NBC Nightly News with the car-bomb story.
As the  Boston investigation heated up, the feds began to take his allegations seriously,  and he became a key witness.
Meanwhile the LaRouchians blithely continued with their credit card and loan  schemes.
They believed Roy's assurances of support from "down the way," the  cumulative faith built up by a decade of transmissions from Mister Ed and the  Source.
When almost four hundred federal agents and state and local police  officers swooped down on the NCLC's Leesburg headquarters in October 1986,  the LaRouchians could blame it in no small part on the misleading advice of their  Ku Klux Klan scout.
Roy was indicted for obstructing justice, along with several of LaRouche's  security honchos.
When I met him at a hotel near La Guardia Airport several  months later, he was scared, and with good reason.
He was already a convicted  felon.
He had avoided a prison sentence on his first conviction, but this time he'd  end up with the Black Muslims and Pive Percenters.
Although he had sung "like a  canary" (according to the PBI) the day after his arrest, the feds were no longer  interested in cutting a deal.
Roy had jerked them around, first promising to testify  and then playing coy and claiming the feds had "tortured" him.
The LaRouchians  no longer trusted him, and wouldn't help with his legal expenses.
Roy told me that LaRouche had ruined his life, and that his mother would lose  her home.
Anything illegal that happened was the LaRouchians' fault, not his.
He'd never had anything to do with defrauding any old ladies.
Indeed, the  LaRouchians had ripped off his mother and his uncle for thousands of dollars  behind his back.
Pick, Wenger, and the Major meanwhile had all double-crossed  him.
The remark about 451 degrees Pahrenheit had merely been a literary  reference to the Ray Bradbury novel; Pick had misinterpreted it because he was  illiterate and stupid.
Roy plucked out his glass eye, wiped it on his shirt, held it up  to the light, and regarded it with his good eye, like Hamlet gazing upon the skull  of Yorick.
"Life is more than bullet holes," he said.
In December 1986 he went on  trial in Boston federal court.
After hearing prosecution witnesses Pick, Wenger,  Charles Tate, and others, the jury found Roy guilty of obstruction of justice.
He  was fined $50,000 and sentenced to three years in prison.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Twenty-two   Join the Spooks and Stay Out of Jail   It would be all too easy to say that Frankhouser's manipulation of the  LaRouchians proves them to be a band of naive kooks.
Undeniably, top NCLC  security staffers believed Frankhouser's tall tales.
But the idea that LaRouche  himself completely shared his followers' gullibility ignores his ability to operate on  both rational and irrational levels at once.
Again and again, he has given vent to  paranoia and delusions of grandeur, only to end up achieving useful pragmatic  results from such behavior.
He attacked Kissinger in an apparently demented  way, but reaped the reward of sympathy on the ultraright, greater fanaticism  among his followers, and a fearsome reputation among liberals.
He accused a  vast range of enemies of plotting to assassinate him during the Chris White affair,  but also used the episode to consolidate his control of the NCLC.
Such behavior is not unlike that of many totalitarian leaders in whom madness  and cunning have mingled inextricably.
The seemingly paranoid Stalin accepted  as truth the preposterous stories of his secret police about spies and saboteurs,  but slyly used these concoctions to strengthen his power.
It is easier to see this  in a Stalin or Hitler, because they operated on a grand scale whereas LaRouche  has been confined to a small stage.
LaRouche is quite aware of this type of slyness.
In two essays on Soviet history  written in the mid-1970s, he discussed Stalin's "hysterical" and "propitiatory"  beliefs--his "nonsense-theses"--and how they were basically an "expediency" that  enabled Stalin to handle his own neuroses while getting other people to do his  bidding.
Stalin's incessant discovery of plots was a matter of "fantastic lying"; it  worked because of the "wishful credulousness" of the Communist rank and file.
At certain moments, Stalin "might have reached the point of almost believing his  own rhetoric," but remained in touch with the "contrary knowledge" within himself  (i.e., the knowledge that his rhetoric was ultimately just a manipulative device).
LaRouche argued (in effect) that Stalin's craziness served his cunning in the  interests of consolidating his power.
In his own behavior, LaRouche carried out a  refined version of the formula: Craziness serves cunning in the interests of  staying out of legal trouble if you're too weak to seize power.
All this is well exemplified in his relationship with Frankhouser.
From the very  beginning in 1976-77, there were pragmatic reasons for LaRouche to accept and  promote Frankhouser's "fantastic lying," whether or not he believed it.
The NCLC  had begun its first wave of white-collar scams: kiting checks, welching on loans,  taking advantage of wire-transfer errors in order to rip off banks, filing fraudulent     matching-funds applications witli tine Federal Election Commission.
This was  low-level stuff, but it was more than enough to make anyone nervous who had  never before engaged in illicit activity.
LaRouche began to speculate at that point  on how criminals gain immunity from prosecution.
The key, he suggested in mid-  1977, was to become useful to the CIA.
His apparent model was Mitch WerBell:  An early 1977 NCLC internal report on WerBell showed that the LaRouchians  firmly believed the CIA and other intelligence agencies had helped him out of  legal difficulties on several occasions.
But LaRouche believed the successful use of this tactic hinged on the  relationship of forces within the CIA or another protecting agency.
He taught that  the CIA was divided into opposing factions.
The pro-"humanist" faction might  protect a WerBell or a LaRouche, but what if the anti-"humanist" faction were in  charge?
LaRouche had the example of WerBell's 1975 indictment, when the  Company didn't look after him.
(We will examine this case later.)
He also had the  example of Frankhouser's indictment for transporting stolen explosives while  working for the ATF.
Both Mitch and Roy, and Bob Miles too, had been "hung out  to dry" by antihumanist spooks (so the LaRouchians argued).
What do you do  when the antihumanists are out to get you?
Or when the charges are so serious  that even your allies can't intercede for you?
The answer is to adopt the "national-security defense" (also known as the "CIA  defense").
Whatever you're charged with, blame it on the CIA or the White  House.
Say you thought you were following secret orders from high up and/or  that you were framed because you knew too much about embarrassing  operations.
If you can prove you've ever been involved with the CIA, many  people will believe the rest of your story.
Possibly even the jury will go for it.
LaRouche apparently figured this tactic had worked for WerBell in his smuggling  trial (backed up by the fortuitous death of the government's key witness) and that  it may have helped Frankhouser avoid a prison sentence in the stolen-dynamite  trial.
But both WerBell and Frankhouser could establish that they had, indeed, worked  for the intelligence or law enforcement community in some fashion.
LaRouche  built a comparable record for himself.
First, he offered the CIA his services and  did everything he could to be useful (so they would want to protect him).
Second,  he compiled a detailed record of dealings with presumed agents.
If he had to go  into court, he could use this record to establish that whatever he did was done  under CIA orders, at arm's length if not directly.
For the purpose of the CIA defense, it is not altogether necessary that one's  dealings be directly with the CIA (since the agency won't reveal the identity of its  agents anyway).
The important thing is simply what a jury will believe.
Thus, if  one doesn't have a connection with real agents, one might as well use ex-agents,  suspected agents, or even make-believe agents whom one can then staunchly     maintain are real agents.
Hence, tine large number of spookish consultants,  including Frankhouser, that LaRouche surrounded himself with.
Frankhouser and Fick both tell a revealing story about this.
They would go to the  Leesburg mansion to brief LaRouche on the latest scoop from the Source, but he  never seemed interested.
"He really didn't want to listen, he just wanted a captive  audience," Frankhouser said.
"Five minutes into the briefing, he'd cut us off and  change the subject, doing most of the talking himself.
He'd go into these amazing  monologues, for hours, talking about a . . . lost civilization."
Apparently LaRouche  knew on some level that the reports were worthless, but went through the  motions of meeting with Frankhouser and Fick anyway to build his record for his  future CIA defense.
(In 1 987-88 his lawyers would tell the court in Boston that the  LaRouche organization sincerely believed Frankhouser and Fick worked for the  CIA.)
Meanwhile, LaRouche would acquiesce in Roy's deceiving of his own  Security staffers, since they would work twice as hard if they thought they were  involved in deep operations with real cutouts and real spooks.
In other words,  while Roy thought he was scamming LaRouche, it appears that the NCLC  chairman had actually figured out a way to get his money's worth out of Roy--by  using him to keep the Security staff brainwashed.
Documents filed by LaRouche's attorneys prior to his 1988 Boston criminal trial  shed much light on his multileveled approach to using alleged CIA connections to  stay out of jail.
First, they reveal that in early 1 982 he was definitely thinking in  terms of gaining outright immunity via CIA intervention.
At the time he had  special reasons for anxiety.
Several civil fraud suits were pending, the Federal  Election Commission was probing his campaign finances, and a New York  bankruptcy court judge had ordered an investigation of the NCLC's alleged  looting of a computer software firm.
Furthermore, the Detroit NCLC, including  several people with detailed knowledge of the NCLC's ties to organized crime,  had resigned en masse.
Frankhouser suddenly popped up with a proposal from  Mister Ed: In return for LaRouche's not exposing an alleged CIA involvement in  the Detroit defections, LaRouche and his loyalists would be given immunity from  federal prosecution for any events occurring prior to January 1982.
Their  immunity status supposedly would be worked out personally between the CIA  director and the Attorney General!
Doubtless this plan was a hoax, but it suggests that Frankhouser and/or Mister  Ed had picked up on LaRouche's earlier writings on the CIA/immunity question.
As to the request that LaRouche shut his mouth about Detroit, this had a real  basis.
He was engaging at the time in indiscreet talk about the NCLC's  Teamster/racketeer connections and an alleged joint venture in the financial  printing industry.
Many people would have wanted to use the "Mister Ed" channel  to quash such talk (for instance.
Bob Miles, who knew many Michigan Teamsters  from the days when he handled their insurance).
The suggestion that LaRouche  keep quiet about CIA involvement in Detroit can therefore be read as a reference  to mob involvement.
In the early 1980s, LaRouche appeared to have built a strong first line of defense  by making himself genuinely useful to the intelligence community and the  Reagan administration.
He had personally met with Inman and several NSC  officials.
Yet he was not satisfied.
In 1983 he requested a meeting at Langley  with Inman's successor, John McMahon.
Granted a half hour with two of  McMahon's aides, he arrived like a head of state with Helga and an entourage of  assistants and bodyguards.
According to a CIA report on the meeting filed in  Boston federal court, he had promised to reveal information on "drug trafficking,  gunrunning, and terrorism," But instead of delivering the information promised,  LaRouche came bearing a strange proposal for a mutually beneficial "continuing  relationship" (i.e., regular meetings with no cutouts) between his organization and  the CIA.
He boasted of his good sources in the French presidential palace and  among Spain's "old crowd."
The CIA official (name redacted) who wrote the  report was not impressed.
What was really going on here?
LaRouche had a dozen channels for his  "continuing relationship" without embarrassing either the CIA or his own  followers.
They had kept up contact with Inman after he left the CIA, and WerBell  was still friendly.
Why should LaRouche show up on Langley's doorstep begging  for what was not necessary and, if obtained, would only undermine his value in  the realm of arm's-length intelligence operations?
One could say it was his vanity  or his hunger for life in the Inner Ring, but a more tangible motive may also have  been involved.
At the time, his organization was embarking on risky new fund-  raising practices, such as the nationwide solicitation of allegedly fraudulent loans  from senior citizens.
Being indirectly useful to the CIA might not be enough to  prevent indictments.
The LaRouchians needed a record of direct dealings with  the agency that would allow them to claim in court that they were a genuine  "proprietary" following the orders not just of a cutout but also of high-ranking  agency officials.
More important, they needed leverage to force the CIA to protect  them.
What better weapon than the ability to hold a press conference at any time  and "prove" the CIA was behind them?
LaRouche believed this could create  major problems for the CIA and within the executive branch generally.
In his  1987 review of Bob Woodward's Veil, LaRouche said that if Casey had ever met  with him and knowledge of the meeting had leaked out, the result would have  been a "major political explosion."
The request he delivered to McMahon's aides  apparently was an attempt to plant just such a bomb.
How could LaRouche believe in 1983 that the CIA would fall into his trap?
First,  he was not as controversial then as before or since.
Almost four years had  passed since any major media had exposed him.
His publications had become  more artful in masking the NCLC's anti-Semitism, and Reagan administration  officials who met with NCLC members in 1982-83 didn't seem worried about any  fallout.
Second, LaRouche had the example of Admiral Inman, who had  compromised himself by agreeing to a seemingly unnecessary meeting with  LaRouche while still CIA deputy director.
Third, LaRouche knew that although  some CIA officials might consider him embarrassingly extreme, several of his     followers were respected for their intelligence analyses.
(For instance, one of  them gained consulting work from a prestigious Washington risk-analysis firm  after defecting.)
Fourth, the NCLC indeed had international sources such as  LaRouche alluded to in the Langley meeting: He proved his boast about high-  level French contacts by publishing a certain purloined letter a few months later.
Given these factors, it was not beyond the realm of possibility for the CIA to  decide to give LaRouche regular meetings as an easy concession to keep the  flow of information coming.
The CIA did not accept LaRouche's proposal, being either too smart or too  careful.
But if the CIA had agreed to give LaRouche regular meetings or some  kind of quasi-proprietary status, the consequences would have been interesting  indeed.
He would have had a much stronger "CIA defense" in his 1988 trial, and  he also could have exerted real pressure on the CIA to rescue him prior to the  indictments.
For instance, he could have threatened to create havoc regarding  the February 1986 assassination of Swedish Prime Minister and longtime  LaRouchian smear target Olof Palme.
Shortly after the Palme hit, Swedish police  arrested a suspect who was identified as a LaRouche follower (although  LaRouche denied it).
Lacking sufficient evidence to indict this suspect, the  Swedish authorities embarked on a wide-ranging probe of possible LaRouchian  involvement.
(For at least two years, the LaRouchians remained under  investigation, although in December 1988 a suspect totally unrelated to them was  arrested.)
If LaRouche had gained his "continuing" CIA relationship, he would  have been in a position to bring automatic suspicion on the CIA for involvement  in Palme's death.
False as the impression might have been, anti-American and  pro-nuclear disarmament forces in Western Europe could have used it.
Although  LaRouche's followers claim to be pro-NATO, they would have justified the leftist  propaganda bonanza as being necessary to save LaRouche, who in their view is  more important to NATO than a bunch of missiles anyway.
Much of the above is hypothetical (a hypothesis of the higher hypothesis, as  LaRouche would say).
But it is revealing to look at what happened when the  Boston indictments came down.
First, the LaRouchians retained Washington  attorney Bernard Fensterwald who had previously represented Ed (the CIA made  me do it) Wilson, James Earl (the FBI made me do it) Ray, James (Nixon made  me do it) McCord, Mitch (the DEA made me do it) WerBell, as well as the former  employees of Task Force 157, a kind of predecessor to the NCLC in the parallel-  CIA game.
The LaRouchians then began to put together their "CIA defense" in  detail.
They couldn't directly prove they were acting under CIA control, but they  could present a circumstantial case by simply describing their wide dealings with  all kinds of people in, around, and on the fringes of the intelligence community,  (They also could lay out dozens of conflicting conspiracy theories to confuse the  jury and the press, with each of these theories the pretext for one or more of the  scores of delaying motions filed by their virtual army of defense attorneys.)
A sanitized form of LaRouclie's CIA defense was filed with the court "under seal"  (pursuant to the Classified Information Procedures Act) by Fensterwald's law  partner, Daniel S. Alcorn.
Although full of details about the antics of Frankhouser  and Pick, the twenty-six-page report curiously neglected to mention Mitch  WerBell, Admiral Inman, James Angleton, Ray Cline, Paul Corbin, Danny  Murdock, Barney Cochran, Walt Mackem, Tom Miner, Lucien Conein, or  numerous other interesting contacts.
Nor did it mention any of the alleged  meetings of LaRouche underlings with CIA officials that they had boasted about  to their NSC contacts.
Loudoun Times-Mirror reporter Bryan Chitwood thinks that LaRouche was doing  a limited hangout.
To use Eric Ambler's terminology, he was using his play  material and signaling that if he didn't get relief fast he'd lay out something a bit  heavier.
Indeed, the report listed certain more sensitive matters that might be  "raised during the course of Boston litigation" relating to "direct channels"  between the CIA and the LaRouchians.
What was briefly described appeared to  be halfway between play material and reality.
A bluff?
Among the revelations  promised was a detailed account of Jeffrey Steinberg's dealings with the  Guatemalan Army and his alleged official debriefings by "CIA, Department of  Defense, Drug Enforcement Administration, Joint Special Operations Command,  Fort Bragg, N.C., and an official of the Vice President's National Narcotics Border  Interdiction Service."
Also promised was the history of the NCLC's alleged  dealings with Colonel Frank Salcedo, an official at the time with the Federal  Emergency Management Agency.
Since FEMA, headed in the early 1980s by  right-wing cronies of Ed Meese, already was known for its contingency plans for  a martial-law America in event of nuclear attack, this promised to be fun indeed.
The LaRouche legal brief said that the defendants had presented FEMA with a  "series of proposals for the establishment under FEMA of a special government  intelligence organization at the direct service of the President," apparently a kind  of Meesean precursor of Oliver North's Project Democracy.
Next, the  LaRouchians promised to tell the full story of their relationship with the National  Security Council and of how Judge Clark had supposedly been provided with  "written reports and paraphrase transcripts" of LaRouchian meetings with Soviet  officials "as per guidelines from 'E'" (Mister Ed).
The under-seal document was sent to the CIA and FBI, which both approved its  release (not surprising, considering that the LaRouchians had precensored it  themselves).
The Justice Department, not wanting to give even the appearance  of credibility to LaRouche's national security defense, made copies and passed  them out to reporters under the eyes of stunned LaRouchians.
But this was by no means the end of the defendants' obfuscation.
They knew that  the NCLC's dealings with the intelligence community had left a paper trail and  that some people in government were intensely suspicious of them.
All they had  to do was use subpoenas and the Freedom of Information Act to uncover  incidents in which various officials had suggested that they be investigated.
Indeed, they had been collecting FOIA documents for years, such as Henry  Kissinger's letters to the FBI when NCLC members were harassing him.
They  could weave such items into a pastiche to "prove" a vast government conspiracy  against them.
LaRouche, like Roy in 1975, would emerge as an Agent Hung Out  to Dry.
Naturally they went after the documents in Oliver North's safe.
Since they  had begun exposing Irangate six months before anyone else, it was reasonable  to assume North would have taken at least a passing interest in them.
Sure  enough, a memo from General Richard Secord to North was found: "Lewis has  met with FBI and other agency reps. . . .Our man here claims Lewis has collected  info against LaRouche."
Lewis, it turned out, was Fred Lewis, a former Army  sergeant major who had served in a Delta Force counter-intelligence unit in the  late 1970s and whose resume said that he was "skilled in special sensitive low  visibility operations."
Just what any of this had to do with alleged credit-card fraud at Boston airports  was unclear, but it helped the LaRouchians drag out the trial and embarrass the  prosecutors.
When the defense attorneys demanded all CIA and FBI documents  relevant to the case, the agencies were naturally reluctant to turn over materials  that might compromise their security or simply set a dangerous precedent for  future discovery motions in other cases.
Thus they turned over some documents,  withheld others, and simply failed to identify others because of the vast number  of files that had to be searched.
(Any half-clever defense attorney could have  predicted this.)
The prosecution had little choice but to accept the FBI's and CIA's  solid assurances that they had fully complied with the discovery motions.
Meanwhile the LaRouchians used the FOIA and various forms of snooping to  turn up more documents (for instance, the one from North's safe).
This created  the appearance that the U.S. Attorney's office was involved in a cover-up.
Relations between the FBI and the prosecutors became tense, with the  LaRouchians demanding more documents and the FBI wanting to withhold one  document even at the cost of jeopardizing the entire trial.
(Strangely, the contents  of this document were almost certainly innocuous.)
The chief prosecutor, John  Markham, asked to withdraw from the case during this altercation but later  relented.
The trial was held up for weeks while a search was conducted for more  and more documents.
The LaRouchians wanted millions of documents searched.
Some of the press, smelling CIA blood, was verging on sympathy for LaRouche,  and articles about the trial focused on North rather than credit-card fraud.
By this point the trial had dragged on for five months, and promised to continue  for at least six more.
Several jurors complained of grievous hardship, and Judge  Keeton declared a mistrial.
The Boston Globe subsequently quoted three jurors  as saying they would have voted for acquittal, based on the government's  withholding of evidence.
(In a memorandum and order the following August,  Judge Keeton delivered what in effect was a stinging rebuke to the Reagan  administration regarding the disclosure problem.
The prosecutors, he said, had  been "limited in their ability to fulfill [their disclosure] responsibility by lack of     adequate support and assistance both within and beyond the United States  Attorney's office.")
IVIeanwhile, LaRouche, having planted doubts about the government's motives,  came out with an accusation that best revealed his foresight in dealing with  dubious former federal agents and/or informants through the years.
Having once  warmly welcomed them onto his payroll, he now depicted them as government  moles who had intended all along to set him up.
Ryan Quade Emerson, the  Virginia-based publisher of a counterterrorist newsletter, proved to be the most  useful example.
In 1985, after the federal investigation had begun, the  LaRouchians hired him as a part-time consultant.
They knew he had once been  an FBI informant, and they gave him $250 a week to tell them things they already  knew.
Bryan Chitwood, who has followed the investigation and trial more closely  than any other reporter, states flat-out that "the LaRouchians were setting a trap."
Indeed, it was inevitable that the FBI would get in touch with Emerson.
After he  stopped working for the LaRouchians, he even made a visit to their offices at the  FBI's request.
Although he had not functioned as an FBI plant while on the NCLC  payroll, his murky activities gave the LaRouchians a wedge to suggest  government misconduct.
"They used it to foul up the trial pretty well," said  Chitwood.
"They knew exactly what they were doing."
But during all the legal maneuverings in 1987-88, there was one factor LaRouche  underestimated: The "CIA defense" is useful only if the judge rules it admissible.
Markham, however, submitted a brief attacking the CIA defense at the root by  pointing out that the CIA is not a domestic law enforcement agency.
It has no  power to grant immunity to citizens who commit crimes in furtherance of a  criminal investigation.
LaRouche's relationship to the CIA thus should be deemed  irrelevant to the charges of obstructing justice and credit-card fraud.
Concurring  with this argument.
Judge Keeton ruled that LaRouche's carefully prepared  folderol about the CIA was inadmissible.
Probably the LaRouchians should have tried to pin things on a domestic law  enforcement agency from the beginning, as Jackie Presser did with the FBI and  Mitch WerBell with his alleged White House drug busters.
But when the  LaRouchians went back into court claiming they had been mistaken-that the evil  force hanging them out to dry was really the FBI, not the CIA~it was too late.
Judge Keeton wouldn't buy it.
No matter how much credit one gives to LaRouche's calculated maneuvers,  there remains a substratum of naivete in his dealings with both the real and  make-believe intelligence networks around him.
In part this was a result of his  conspiratorial view of history, which ascribes exaggerated powers to intelligence  agencies in general and the CIA in particular/ LaRouche appears to have really  believed that the CIA director, if he wanted to, could simply pick up the telephone  and tell the Attorney General's office to "quash" an investigation of LaRouche.
Also, LaRouche apparently believed at least a portion of the tips from  Frankhouser and even more of the tips from the "General" and the "Major."
But in  this gullibility he was not unique.
In the demimonde of informers, spies, cutouts,  and control officers, even seasoned professionals get taken for a ride (for  instance, ATF agent Slamon by Frankhouser in 1972).
While Frankhouser and  Fick were feeding reports from imaginary sources to the LaRouche organization  in the early 1980s, an immigrant from El Salvador named Frank Varelli was  running an even more elaborate scam on top FBI officials.
Spinning tales of  terrorist plots in return for $18,000 and a new car, he sucked the FBI into a five-  year investigation involving thousands of man-hours in fifty-two of the FBI's fifty- nine offices.
The target was a left-wing group that was agitating against U.S.  policy in Central America but had no relationship to terrorism.
Furthermore, the various seemingly harebrained "Mister Ed" schemes that  LaRouche became involved in during the late 1970s and early 1980s also had  their counterparts in the world of government spookery.
The closest parallel is  seen in the late CIA director William Casey's Project Democracy, Just as  LaRouche set up his private intelligence news service, as a parallel CIA to do  what the liberals wouldn't let the real CIA do, so Casey set up Project  Democracy.
Just as LaRouche operated through the naive Goldstein and  Steinberg, so Casey chose the pliable Oliver North.
Just as Goldstein and  Steinberg believed in mystic spirals, so North belonged to a charismatic church  whose members spoke in tongues.
Just as Goldstein and Steinberg worked with  the likes of WerBell and Murdock, so North used the services of General Secord  (who was connected with some of the same rogue agents that WerBell knew).
Just as the LaRouchians developed a relationship with General Manuel Noriega,  so also did the Project Democracy crowd.
Just as the LaRouchians spied on  North and revealed his secrets, so North attempted to spy on the LaRouchians.
Just as the LaRouchians raised money from wealthy old ladies to fight  communism, so North's networks raised money from the same old ladies to  supply the Contras.
Just as LaRouche's ill-gotten fund-raising gains disappeared  into a tangle of corporate shells, so Project Democracy funds became "lost" in  numbered overseas accounts.
Just as LaRouche came under federal  investigation, so also did North.
Just as aides to LaRouche shredded documents,  so also did North's secretary.
Fawn Hall.
Just as LaRouche claimed his  indictment was a plot by the Democratic Party and the KGB, so North claimed to  be the victim of Democrats who don't understand the dangers of communism.
One is forced to conclude that LaRouche is not just an aberration in the world of  spookery.
To a disturbing degree he is just one of the boys.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
PART SIX: The Security Staff   " Of all passions the passion for the Inner Ring is most skilful in  making a man who is not yet a very bad man do very bad things."
--C.S. LEWIS   Chapter Twenty-three  The School of Dirty Tricks   Every totalitarian movement needs a special cadre for secret, illegal, and often  violent activities.
Heinrich Himmler and his SS played this role for the Nazis  during their rise to power in the early 1930s.
Depending on circumstances, such  a cadre may organize assassinations, rob banks, infiltrate the police, or carry out  a variety of tasks aimed at protecting the movement and weakening the enemy's  will.
When the NCLC shifted into a fascist mode in the mid-1970s, there was no class  warfare raging in American streets.
Hence what LaRouche needed as his special  cadre were not storm trooper types but clever operatives skilled in primarily  nonviolent covert activities, especially of the dirty tricks variety.
To meet this need  he set up a unit of "counterintelligence agents"--the NCLC security staff (referred  to as "Security" by insiders).
In a 1974 memorandum LaRouche explained the "psychological profile" of a  good Security operative and how such a person can be controlled.
This was  ostensibly a discussion of CIA agents, but the description bore an uncanny  resemblance to the elite security unit that LaRouche had already begun to create  within the NCLC.
Agent types, he wrote, are recruited out of university  humanities and social studies programs "traditionally free of the obligation to  demonstrate anything concerning reality in the outer world."
(LaRouche recruited  his original cadre among such students, chiefly at Columbia University.)
For such  individuals the CIA becomes an extension of academia where they can achieve  "a sense of power without leaving the home and playground for the actual adult  world."
The typical agent thus lacks any "inner identity" except his dependence  on the CIA.
He is highly "suggestible" and plagued by "superstitious fears."
Easily  manipulated by arbitrary phrases and formulas, he has many features in common  with a "synthetic zombie."
Of course this description bore little, if any, resemblance to real CIA agents, but it  did fit the NCLC as a cult and the type of tricksters LaRouche needed for his  security work-individuals who could totally immerse themselves in petty forms of     intrigue in obedience to liis will.
Indeed, those he placed in charge of Security  reflected the profile perfectly.
Security began in 1973-73 as a small karate-trained team to protect NCLC  members from alleged Communist Party bullying.
It organized Operation Mop Up  and began stockpiling weapons, but soon turned away from any truly risky  confrontations with the outside world.
It was far safer to harass LaRouche's  enemies from a safe range via smear leaflets, anonymous telephone calls, and  legal frame-ups.
In the wake of the Chris White affair.
Security took on the functions of an internal  secret police.
It watched members for signs of disaffection and harassed any  dropout who publicly attacked the organization or tried to get others to leave.
The  members of Security developed a vested interest in discovering plots  everywhere: The more assassins and other enemies they could report to  LaRouche, the more power and prestige they gained.
Former member Dan  Jacobs writes that they effected a kind of "coup" within the organization, with  LaRouche's blessings.
Jacobs described this as the NCLC's "Thermidor  Reaction."
NCLC organizational director Warren Hamerman defined Security's mission in  1976 as being "to detect and investigate enemy deployments against the  organization, and to plan and execute offensive counterthrusts."
The  counterthrusts, generally called "counterpunch deployments," included attacks on  public figures whom LaRouche accused of being part of the conspiracy against  him, as well as genuine opponents such as journalists or rival extremist  organizations.
For years Security operated behind a reinforced steel door and bulletproof glass  in the NCLC's Columbus Circle headquarters.
The two Security chiefs, Jeffrey  Steinberg and Paul Goldstein, maintained daily contact with regional Security  officers in Detroit, Los Angeles, and other cities.
Members of Security were responsible for the NCLC's earliest propaganda  attacks on Israel and the "Zionist lobby."
Major General John K. Singlaub, after  several visits from them in 1 977, told The New York Times they were "the worst  group of anti-Semitic Jews I've encountered."
Former members say that Jewish  Security staffers went out of their way to display the most fanatical loyalty-and  engage in the nastiest harassment of outsiders-because they never knew for  sure if they were really trusted by LaRouche and his top non-Jewish aides.
Former Security staffer Charles Tate, a prosecution witness in the Boston trial,  testified he never dared question NCLC policy in the presence of Steinberg and  Goldstein.
"They don't understand doubt.
It's not a category that exists for  them.
...So you just don't-unless you want to get in a lot of trouble, you don't say  'I don't believe that'.
.
.
to those people."
Security's duties included providing bodyguards and servants for Lyn and Helga.
Wlien tine couple moved to the Riverdale section of the Bronx in the late 1970s,  Security staffers were assigned to sit with a shotgun at the apartment door.
Many  had never handled weapons before and presumably knew no more than to point  it at any intruder and pull the trigger.
A frequent visitor recalled that "LaRouche  was waited on hand and foot by Security.
They cooked for him, they made his  bed, they did his laundry."
LaRouche called for more and more protection during and after his 1980  presidential campaign.
A multitiered system evolved, including off-duty and  former police officers operating through a New York private detective agency, the  Reading nightriders, Mitch WerBell's mercenaries, and the Security staff itself.
LaRouche claimed to be constantly threatened by such enemies as Mossad, the  KGB, the Knights of Malta, the Yippies, the Freemasons, and Henry Kissinger.
Helga decided that she too was a target of lethal intentions after a near traffic  accident on an autobahn in Germany.
The NCLC came to spend millions of  dollars each year on the bodyguards who followed Lyn and Helga everywhere in  both the United States and Europe.
Ultimately the Security setup was a good investment, for it kept the NCLC  membership in the paranoid frenzy that LaRouche had learned was most  conducive to maximum results in fund raising.
But protection bred more  protection, as the outside hired guns encouraged increasingly wild fantasies in  order to get more overtime.
Although believing these fantasies, Steinberg and  Goldstein were also swept up in the profiteering fever.
They established two  corporations, SSG International and Cincinnatus Associates, to receive  payments for campaign security services, as well as to recycle reports on  LaRouche's enemies to multinational corporations.
When LaRouche moved to Loudoun County, Virginia, in 1983, he deployed as  many as ten guards on each twelve-hour shift at his estate.
Supposedly the  guards, armed with Walther PPKs and MAC-IOs, were prowling their respective  free-fire zones under all weather conditions.
But LaRouche didn't seem to really  care how vigilant they were.
In cold or rainy weather, they just stayed in the  guardhouse.
The electronic alarm was routinely ignored, since branches  brushing against the fence in a breeze would often trigger it.
Any enterprising hit  man could have slipped under the barbed wire that kept the neighbor's cows from  fertilizing Lyndon's lawn.
(Security precautions were tighter at LaRouche's villa in  Stradecken-Elsheim, in West Germany, which was protected by a ten-foot-high  wall topped with barbed wire, television monitors, electric grids, and floodlights-  the very model of a high-tech bunker.)
The major vendor providing guards with police backgrounds for the Leesburg  estate was Metro Executive Protection and Security Consultants, Inc., a New  York firm headed by former NYPD officer James Powers.
According to Phil  Perlonga, a former Powers assistant, LaRouche was the firm's principal client in     the early 1980s.
Its success in serving him helped it expand into other areas.
For  instance, it developed a clientele among Manhattan landlords by gathering  evidence for eviction proceedings against tenants of rent-regulated apartments.
(In 1986, Powers told The New York Times that his firm had prepared  background reports on 5,000 tenants; many were for landlords planning co-op  conversions.)
Shortly after the move to Leesburg, several Security staffers set up Premiere  Services, Inc., a front for obtaining firearms permits.
Among the firm's officers  was Robert Kay, who claimed to be a graduate of WerBell's counterterrorist  school, as well as the American Security Training Institute in Chicago and the  Lethal Force Institute in Long Beach, California.
According to Loudoun County  records, some of the Security staffers were walking arsenals; for instance.
Rick  Magraw, who owned a Colt Commander 45, a Sig-Sauer P. 380, a Browning 9  mm, and a MAC-10 submachine pistol.
When the permits came up for renewal in 1985, the sheriff's office was fed up  with the NCLC's intimidation of local residents.
Premiere Services said it needed  the permits to protect LaRouche, but Deputy Don Moore told the court that the  threats to LaRouche's life were "nebulous to the point of unreality," and "chiefly  intended to promote a 'bunker mentality.'"
Eventually the judge granted the  renewals subject to restriction: LaRouche's armed guards would have to inform  the Sheriff's Department whenever they planned to accompany LaRouche  outside his estate.
(In 1987 their request for renewal was denied outright.)
Some members of Security were skeptical that LaRouche was really in danger  from international assassins.
But it was their job to provide the evidence, and  they did so, for otherwise LaRouche would have removed them from their  relatively cushy jobs and sent them back to field duty-the boring, low-status work  of manning literature tables at airports or running boiler-room loan rip-offs.
Charles Tate recalls often writing security reports or passing along rumors from  informants that he knew to be nonsense, simply to avoid hassles.
However,  Steinberg and Goldstein spent long hours on the phone soaking up the latest  preposterous tips from "Clay" (Roy Frankhouser), "the Major," "the General,"  "Leviticus," and assorted other paid "consultants."
However, Security's work was not just a game (although even the make-believe  part served a serious function in maintaining the NCLC's controlled environment  and motivating the membership to work hard).
Security developed imaginative  and effective techniques for gathering intelligence and harassing enemies.
Most  important was the undercover phone call or interview.
Although there were many  variations on this tactic, basically it meant a staff member calling or visiting an  outsider (usually an enemy) under false pretenses or using a false identity.
It was  first employed in 1973 when the NCLC was at war with black-nationalist Amiri  Baraka.
Paul Goldstein sent a directive to "all locals" urging them to set up  meetings with "individuals of [the] Baraka type" in order to "pump them for     information."
He suggested posing as an "innocuous radical or interested  sympatliizer."
LaRouclie liimself, during liis 1980 New Hampsliire primary campaign, told the  Associated Press that his followers used "all kinds" of covers and impersonation  tactics to investigate their enemies.
"Where a press is running a direct operation  against us...," he said, "that's an open target.
We can impersonate them all we  want to because they are doing it to us.
It's just an open field."
Charles Tate  testified he saw his fellow Security staffers make hundreds of undercover calls in  the early 1980s, often with tape recorders running without the callee's  knowledge.
"They were pretending to be priests, ministers, rabbis, newspaper  reporters, doctors, lawyers, Indian chiefs," he said.
The late Canon Edward West of New York's Episcopal Cathedral of St. John the  Divine was the victim of two LaRouchian imposters posing as freelance writers.
They interviewed him and took his picture while preparing a dossier on the  Knights of Malta.
Later, they wrote an abusive article suggesting he was a  homosexual and saying his office reminded them of "Dracula's castle."
The  reason for the abuse was obvious from the text of the interview.
Asked what he  thought of the LaRouche organization.
Canon West denounced it as "terribly anti-  Semitic" and added, "I have violent feelings about anti-Semitism."
The impostures sometimes were clumsy.
Herbert Quinde called up NBC Nightly  News producer Bob Windrem claiming to be "Herb Kurtz," a reporter interested in  LaRouche.
Windrem smelled a rat, and after meeting with Quinde was able to  identify him from a Hartford Courant photo.
(Quinde had run as a LaRouchian  candidate in Hartford.)
But Quinde once followed me onto the shuttle from New  York to Washington, took the seat next to me, and convincingly introduced  himself as "David Feingold," a fictitious AFL-CIQ researcher.
In 1981 one "Jean-Claude Adam," an alleged French Defense Ministry official,  gained interviews with William Bundy and Winston Lord at the Council on Foreign  Relations.
He also called several journalists who had written about LaRouche,  trying to find out who their sources were.
Photographed after one such meeting,  "Jean-Claude" was identified as Laurent Murawiec, an EIR editor.
The most sinister undercover efforts were directed against anti-Klan groups.
According to Tate, collecting this information was a "regular fixation" and  reflected the Security staff's friendly ties with violence-prone white supremacists  such as Bob Miles.
In 1981 an NCLC member pretending to be a civil rights  activist infiltrated an anti-Klan conference at Howard University.
The  LaRouchians then published a list of the attendees, which must have been  interesting reading for the Klan.
Tate said that a Security staffer was assigned to  make undercover phone calls every few days to the National Anti-Klan Network  in Atlanta to "get snippets which would be given to Roy Frankhouser."
He  recalled a "swap" in which "we gave Roy all our files on the Jewish Defense     League and we got from him in return a batcli of Klan publications."
Tate said lie  personally photocopied the files on the JDL for Frankhouser.
In general,  Frankhouser (who was in constant contact with Miles) had unrestricted access to  Security's files, "If he said 'our people need to see such and such,' he'd be given  it," Tate said.
Security staffers sometimes claimed to be stringers for Intercontinental Media  Service, with offices in the National Press Building in Washington.
The operator  of this shadowy outfit was Edward von Rothkirch, a friend of the Liberty Lobby.
Charles Tate testified in the 1987 trial of Frankhouser that von Rothkirch, who  was called "the Baron" by Security, "would accredit somebody with a press card  to appear as though he was a real reporter working for real newspapers so that  he could do interviews."
According to former Metro employee Phil Perlonga, the  Security staff in 1982-83 had "stacks of blank press cards" from IMS.
When a  card was needed, Goldstein would sign von Rothkirch's name.
Perlonga was  given an IMS card and instructed to use it to gain entrance to Henry Kissinger's  birthday party and serve legal papers on him.
Perlonga took the card, but says  he managed to evade serving the papers.
LaRouchian security and intelligence staffers often have impersonated real  reporters.
In 1 981 , U.S. News & World Report filed a $1 .5 million suit against EIR  and New Solidarity after a LaRouchian posed in phone interviews as its White  House correspondent, Sara Fritz.
In 1983, pursuant to a settlement agreement, a  federal district judge in Washington issued a permanent injunction barring staff  members of EIR and New Solidarity from henceforth impersonating any U.S.  News & World Report staffer.
Jeff Steinberg later said the NCLC had stopped  using this tactic.
In fact.
Security staffers gained interviews just as easily by using  their own names and identifying themselves as freelance writers or college  students working on a research project.
Indeed, when they openly identified  themselves as EIR reporters they sometimes received the same deference as  members of the mainstream press.
Some targeted persons would not have heard  of EIR before and would assume it was a legitimate newsmagazine.
Others  would know of its LaRouche connection, but would talk anyway out of politeness  or to demonstrate their broad-mindedness.
(EIR gained a 1982 interview with  Philip Klutznik, former World Jewish Congress president and Secretary of  Commerce in the Carter administration; he commiserated with the interviewer  over how people are sometimes unfairly accused of anti-Semitism.)
Security  staffers also openly called people they had previously harassed or were involved  in litigation with.
Such victims would stay on the phone, hoping to find out just  what LaRouche was planning against them next.
A brash and hardworking Security staffer can conduct a phone "sweep" of  LaRouche's opposition in a single day.
He may openly identify himself as a  LaRouchian, use a fictitious identity, or pretend to be a real person, depending  on the targeted person's vulnerabilities.
A frequent pretense in the early 1980s  was to be Chip Berlet, an anti-LaRouche journalist in Chicago.
Since Berlet was     a freelancer who did not keep regular office hours, it was difficult for the callee to  check this out.
By staying on the phone long hours and making one call after another with the  speed of a telephone sales solicitor, Security staffers rapidly pick up large  amounts of information-not only from what the victims say but also from what  they don't say.
For instance, a May 5, 1982, Security document entitled  "Harassment Networks" summarized twelve phone calls to alleged LaRouche  enemies across the political spectrum, all apparently made by the same person.
Among those called were Berlet, Dana Beal of the Yippies, Arch Puddington of  the League for Industrial Democracy, Jerry Eisenberg of the Jewish Defense  League, Sheldon Ranz of The Generation After/Holocaust Survivors USA, Justin  Finger of the Anti-Defamation League, and Fred Eiland of the Federal Election  Commission.
The list also included a National Jewish Community Relations  Council staff member, Detroit financier Max Fisher's secretary, and a rabbi who  deprograms Moonies.
In most cases the caller elicited bits of information about  the targeted person's whereabouts and/or current activities and/or contacts with  other targeted persons-information which could then be "cross-gridded."
When  Berlet refused to talk, the caller gloated in his notes that "Berlet is currently  paranoid as hell."
In fact the encouraging of suspicious attitudes among  LaRouche opponents was one of the benefits of the telephone sweeps.
Some  journalists simply would not discuss LaRouche with any caller unless they had  time to thoroughly check his identity first.
The LaRouchians also used the telephone as a psychological assault weapon.
In  1980, reporters in New Hampshire obtained a copy of a special LaRouche "New  Hampshire Target List" of state political figures to be harassed.
The names  included the governor, the attorney general, the secretary of state, and the  mayors and city clerks of several towns.
"These are the criminals to burn-we  want calls coming in to these fellows day and night," the instructions said.
Attorney General Thomas Rath received about fifty phone calls at his home on  the Sunday prior to primary day.
The callers would say things like "We know  where you live."
When the Federal Election Commission was investigating LaRouche's 1980  campaign finances, the LaRouchians made threatening phone calls to Charles  Steele, the commission's general counsel.
In federal court testimony in 1987,  former NCLCer Tate recalled the Steinbergs arriving late at the Security offices  one morning.
"They said that the reason.
.
.
was because [Mr. Steele] had been  receiving late-night phone calls and had received threats on his life very, very  late at night; and that even though they were kind of late that day, they were sure  that Mr. Steele's day was going to be even worse and that he had slept even  worse...."   Another surrogate assault weapon is the LaRouchian printing press, which  churns out smear leaflets and articles against journalists and other enemies.
often featuring outlandish sexual charges.
In this, LaRouche and his top aides  have much practice-they have routinely accused their own rank-and-file followers  of sexual misconduct, repressed homosexuality, etc., ever since the ego-  stripping days in the early 1970s.
The first public smear sheets were directed  against a faction that quit in 1974.
They had naively discussed details of their sex  lives during NCLC psychological sessions.
Upon their resignation.
New Solidarity  printed up a smear sheet that went into graphic detail.
Much of it was taken from  a "confession" written by a former member of the faction who remained with the  LaRouchians and was pressured to prove his loyalty by tattling on his former  comrades.
Thousands of copies of the smear sheet were passed out on  Manhattan's Upper West Side, where leaders of the faction lived.
As Security became bolder, it ceased to worry about obtaining "confessions"  from anyone.
It simply made up the smears out of thin air.
Russ Bellant, a Detroit  freelancer, came home one evening in the late 1970s to find that his neighbors  had received invitations to a "gay coming-out" party at his house, Marcie Permut,  a twenty-two-year-old researcher for NBC-TV's Chicago affiliate, was working on  a LaRouche story in 1 984 when leaflets appeared on car windshields on the  block where she and her parents lived.
The leaflets claimed she was a prostitute  and gave her parents' phone number.
The cynicism behind such allegations was revealed most clearly in the 1984  deposition of Jeffrey Steinberg in LaRouche v, NBC.
Asked by Phil Hirschkop  (the attorney representing Chip Belet and myself) for proof of NCLC allegations  that William F. Buckley was a "sodomist," Steinberg alleged that he had heard it  in the mid-1970s from Gregory Rose, a Security staffer who later defected and  incurred LaRouche's wrath by exposing the NCLC in a cover story for Buckley's  National Review.
Hirschkop then peeled away Steinberg's pretensions as an  investigator:   Q: In New Solidarity, are you familiar that Rose has been termed a   "pathological liar"?
A: Sure.
Q: Would you agree that he is a "pathological liar"?
A: Yes.
Q: Why, then, would someone in your organization repeat the   allegation made by Rose that Bill Buckley is a sodomist?
A: I merely cited Rose as one source....We wouldn't have even   probably considered the issue if he hadn't originally provided lurid   detail to that effect and proposed that as an area to be considered,   but there is other additional material-   Q: What material?
A: Information from confidential sources.
Q: Name the sources.
Steinberg's attorney directed liim not to answer tliis question on "national  security" grounds.
IHirsclikop tlien continued:   Q: Tliese sources, did tliey give tliat information directly to you?
A: No.
Q: To whom did they give that information?
A: To other people who maintained them as confidential sources.
Q: Which people have told you that Bill Buckley is a sodomist?
A: I don't recall.
What Steinberg didn't "recall" was that much of his information about Buckley  actually came from the Liberty Lobby, which hated Buckley because of his strong  stand against allowing anti-Semites to infiltrate the conservative movement.
The Security staff went beyond smear tactics in their 1980 attempts to intimidate  Jon Presstage, then a reporter for the Manchester Union Leader in New  Hampshire.
LaRouche came to Presstage's office for an interview, bringing  several bodyguards with guns.
"They told me there were certain things I could  not say in my stories," Presstage recalled on NBC's First Camera.
LaRouche  "told me that he would make it very painful for me if I wrote certain things.
And I  asked him, well, what do you mean by painful?
And he kind of chuckled with the  rest of the people there and said we have ways of making it painful beyond  lawsuits."
Presstage's family had three cats.
"On successive days following the  articles," he said, "the cats were found on my doorstep, dead."
To assist in Security's harassment campaigns the NCLC maintains a staff of in-  house paralegals and has brought in "hired gun" attorneys to assist with  aggressive lawsuits.
The extralegal motive of such suits was indicated by a  Security memorandum sent out to local NCLC offices in 1984 under the heading  "Make the ADL [Anti-Defamation League] Pay Everywhere."
It called for filing  libel suits and complaints to government agencies against the ADL in every part  of the country: "Go to your best and most political [sic] well-placed contacts and  have them recommend lawyers who have a reputation for competence,  meanness, and who like a good brawl."
The memo then ordered that calls be  made to local news reporters, giving them an ultimatum to either divulge the  "ADL source" of their anti-LaRouche "operation" or else face a libel suit.
The goal  would be to build a "massive national dossier" on the ADL and tie it down  defending itself.
Security waged elaborate counterintelligence campaigns (known among insiders  as "damage control operations") to derail media exposes.
When it found out The  New York Times was preparing an article in 1979, Goldstein and an associate  pretended to be defectors and arranged to meet with reporter Howard Blum,  They brought along a concealed tape recorder and attempted to provoke Blum  into saying something compromising.
At the end of the conversation a third  Security staffer snapped Blum's picture.
The NCLC then called a press     conference to announce that it would sue the Times.
In fact, LaRouche did name  the Times as a defendant in a suit he launched several weeks later against the  Manhattan East Side weekly Our Town, which published a LaRouche series by  me while the Times's story was still in preparation.
Security launched a wave of  harassing phone calls to Our Town's offices, while also attempting to jam lines at  the Times.
One caller to Our Town pretended to be a Times staff attorney  seeking information about Our Town's legal strategy.
Smear leaflets about Our  Town publisher Ed Kayatt were circulated throughout the East Side.
Our Town's  advertisers and banks where the paper was distributed were threatened with  lawsuits.
A crude setup also was attempted: A man alleging to be an executive of  LaRouche's computer company, Computron, dropped by the office and offered to  sell the newspaper stolen financial records.
The offer was declined.
For the next few years Our Town experienced mysterious acts of harassment,  including bomb threats, the disappearance of office files, and visits from  imposters requesting information about LaRouche.
In 1983, after hard-hitting  anti-LaRouche editorials, the offices were broken into, the typesetting and  copying machines and other equipment were smashed, and acid was poured on  the wreckage.
Although Kayatt could not prove the LaRouchians were behind  these actions, he knew of no one else with a sufficiently strong motive.
Security's trickery was used in tandem with legal action against NBC's 1984 First  Camera report on LaRouche's ties to the Reagan administration.
Prior to the  show LaRouche filed a $150 million libel suit to delay or halt it.
Security directed  Roy Frankhouserto shadow NBC reporter Patricia Lynch around Manhattan, and  picketers appeared in front of her office with signs and leaflets calling her a "KGB  whore."
While she was filming in the Washington, D.C., area, they found out she  was scheduled to meet with Senator Moynihan.
Pretending to be a Moynihan  aide, a LaRouche follower called Lynch's researcher several hours before the  interview-ostensibly to get background material for the senator-and probed for  sensitive details about Lynch's sources.
The LaRouchians then tried to intimidate  Moynihan by threatening to publish defamatory material about his family.
LaRouche became worried that his former chief of staff, Gus Kalimtgis, might be  cooperating with NBC.
Charles Tate has testified that one day in early 1984  LaRouche "came downstairs to the security area in his home at Woodburn and  he ordered members of the Security staff to call [Kalimtgis] at his home and  threaten his life."
Tate said that several staff members dutifully made the calls in  LaRouche's presence.
Kalimtgis has confirmed that he received several calls threatening himself, his  wife and children.
The damage control operation against NBC is closely documented by several  hundred pages of Security printouts and notebooks which Tate kept after leaving  the NCLC.
A dossier on NBC reporter Brian Ross described efforts to obtain     information from former targets of liis investigative journalism.
"Calls [are] out to  Teamster networks," it said.
LaRouche's suit against NBC, Lynch, Ross, and the ADL went on trial in federal  court in Alexandria, Virginia, in October 1984.
The jury found for the defendants  and awarded NBC $3 million in punitive damages on a counterclaim relating to  Security's attempt to sabotage the interview with Moynihan.
(The judge later cut  the award to $200,000.)
The outcome might have been quite different had an alleged Security attempt to  buy a witness succeeded.
One of the issues at the trial was whether NBC libeled  LaRouche by reporting that he had urged the assassination of Jimmy Carter and  other public officials in 1977.
Lynch had several sources for the story, including  New Orleans private investigator Gordon Novel.
According to Novel, Jeffrey  Steinberg offered him a large cash payment if he would recant his story and  testify for LaRouche.
Novel said he rejected the offer and promptly informed  Lynch about it.
Steinberg, in his deposition later that year, denied offering money,  but said he did remonstrate with Novel over the phone, accusing him of telling a  "bunch of lies."
Although Novel had appeared on First Camera as an unnamed  source with voice disguised, he was sufficiently incensed by Steinberg's tactics to  allow the use of his name in a subsequent airing of the presidential death threat  charge on NBC Nightly News.
(Charles Tale, who served as the "liaison"  between Security and LaRouche attorney Odin Anderson during the NBC suit,  has testified that everyone in Security knew Novel was telling the truth about the  kill-Carter incident.)
In the autumn of 1984 a federal grand jury convened in Boston to hear evidence  of credit-card fraud by LaRouche fundraisers and shell organizations.
Security  began yet another damage control operation, but this time it resulted in  obstruction of justice indictments of four members of Security's steering  committee-Steinberg, Goldstein, Steinberg's wife, Michelle, and Robert  Greenberg-along with erstwhile adviser Frankhouser and LaRouche himself.
According to the 1986 indictment and courtroom testimony, the Security staff  orchestrated a multilayered conspiracy to derail the investigation.
This effort  allegedly included destroying records, harassing prosecutors, and sending  witnesses to Europe to duck subpoenas.
At the Steinbergs' bond hearing, FBI  special agent Richard Egan testified that Michelle Steinberg had boasted of  hiding witnesses "where the sun doesn't shine."
Egan said the defendants had  engaged in "hundreds" of conversations to plan the conspiracy and had  repeatedly asked Frankhouser and prosecution witness Lee Fick to get the case  fixed through pressure on the government.
Egan also said that authorities had  seized Security staff files on William Weld, the former U.S. Attorney for  Massachusetts, who had initiated the credit-card fraud investigation.
Egan said  the files took up "at least two file cabinets" and included lists of names of Weld's  neighbors, information on his family and in-laws, and even information on guests  at his wedding.
Egan quoted an alleged statement by LaRouche that Weld "does     not deserve to live.
He should get a bullet between the head-between the eyes."
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Twenty-four   Law and Order, LaRouche Style   The Security staff's approach to the FBI and local police in the late 1970s was  similar to LaRouche's pitch to Langley.
Just as the CIA had been weakened by  media exposes and personnel cutbacks, the FBI had fallen on lean times  because of the COINTELPRO scandal, a rash of citizen lawsuits, and a post-  Watergate shift in legislative and judicial opinion regarding government snooping.
In 1976 Attorney General Edward Levi issued guidelines prohibiting the FBI from  conducting surveillance of domestic radical groups unless there was evidence  that a crime had been or was about to be committed.
By 1 983 the FBI was  investigating about 50 domestic security cases, compared with over 20,000 a  decade earlier.
Local police no longer could rely on the FBI for wide-ranging  political intelligence data, and were increasingly limited by their own  departmental guidelines.
Private organizations attempted to fill the vacuum.
One was the Birch Society-  linked Western Goals.
Another was the NCLC Security staff, which crafted a  synthetic law enforcement philosophy sharply opposed to its previous left-wing  anti-police rhetoric.
To begin trading information with local police, private outfits needed their own  base of raw intelligence data.
Fortunately for Security, hundreds of LaRouchians  had belonged to leftist groups before joining the NCLC.
Many wrote up reports on  their former comrades.
A 1977 Security field report stated that a new member,  Roger M., had just been recruited in Hartford, Connecticut.
He previously had  been active with the Venceremos Brigade (a now defunct Maoist sect in  California) and had known its founder, H. Bruce Franklin.
Roger would write up  his experiences, the report said, and if necessary would come to Security  headquarters for a full debriefing.
However, while Roger informed on Bruce  Franklin, another Hartford comrade would keep Security informed about Roger.
Many leftists, unlike Roger, were turned off by the NCLC's recruitment efforts.
Even so, NCLC members would jot down anything derogatory they learned about  these fleeting contacts.
As early as 1974, reports from the Philadelphia office  included thumbnail profiles of trade union and peace activists.
Often included  were rumors regarding sexual, marital, psychiatric, or alcoholism problems.
The LaRouchians tried to keep secret their early efforts as police informers, but  an NCLC telex intended for the organization's Midwestern regional office was  sent by accident to the newsroom of a Minneapolis daily.
Included in the  transmission were instructions to "brief" various police officials.
In Seattle the LaRouchians took to preparing their intelligence reports on forms  similar to those used by U.S. military intelligence, stamped "Classified," "This  Form for Internal Agency Use Only," and "This worksheet contains information  affecting the National Defense of the United States within the meaning of the  Espionage Laws."
A report obtained by the Seattle Sun stated that NCLC  members had briefed the Washington state attorney general's office on radical  groups and would be briefing the Tacoma FBI office.
The Sun quoted the head of  the Portland, Oregon Police Department's Intelligence Division, who named a  local NCLC leader as one of his best sources on local leftists.
Any pretense of secrecy was soon dropped.
Jeffrey Steinberg admitted in a 1977  court case that he and his colleagues were in contact with police departments  and FBI offices in dozens of cities.
In 1978 they circulated a sample report on  terrorism to police officers, together with a catalogue of reports selling for  upwards of $25 on everyone from the Maoists through William F. Buckley.
The  catalogue also offered "Special Investigative Services" based on "extensive files  of raw and semifinished material built up over a nine-year period."
Security staffers were given sales quotas, which they met by calling up police  departments and security-conscious nuclear power companies.
They also set up  literature tables at police and security-industry conventions.
Jeff Steinberg  attended the 1978 International Association of Chiefs of Police convention to  circulate LaRouche's "National Strategy for Crime Control."
The NCLC material targeting police used "terrorism" as a code word for any kind  of left-of-center social protest.
This enabled the LaRouchians to discuss fascism  and police-state methods without unduly embarrassing their audience.
In a 1978  Security sales brochure, LaRouche advocated "surgically precise preventive  action" against the controllers of terrorism.
"It is essential...," he said, "to use the  terrorism as justification for political penalties against the environmentalists," for  in his view the environmentalists were part of the ideological "infrastructure" of  terrorism.
In a 1981 report he advised that the arrest and conviction of those who  commit crimes is not enough for the "effective suppression" of crime.
The  problem is that under our "British" laws we can't arrest someone until he has  actually committed the crime.
What is needed is a system that can "control the  crime before the fact," through "neutralization" of the infrastructure~"political  machines, lawyers, support fronts and the like."
While calling for a state of siege, the LaRouchians were quick to benefit from the  civil libertarian climate they decried.
Many of them applied for their FBI files  under the Freedom of Information Act.
LaRouche and thirteen aides sued the  Justice Department for alleged violations of their civil rights during the NCLC's  leftist days.
By the early 1980s, members of the LaRouche organization had filed  scores of civil rights and ballot access suits against local and federal authorities  across the country.
In 1980, Investigative Leads (IL), a newsletter for local police intelligence units,  was launched as a spin-off from Executive Intelligence Review.
It purported to  give the latest scoop on terrorists, narcotics traffickers.
Communists,  environmentalists, black nationalists, leaders of Jewish-American and Arab-  American organizations, and even elements in the Ku Klux Klan hostile to  LaRouche's own Klan allies.
Like EIR, the newsletter was a shopping window for  intelligence items.
Articles often included a list of the NCLC "reference files"  consulted in preparing an article.
The implication was that these files would be  made available to interested police officers.
An IL house ad boasted that the intent was to build "a network of law  enforcement and security professionals and others who are committed to the  eradication of terrorism and narcotics trafficking."
Ryan Quade Emerson, a writer  on extremist groups who served as a part-time "intelligence analyst" for the  LaRouchians during 1985-86, claims that IL editor Robert Greenberg had  sources in "dozens of police departments."
"It was his full-time job to cultivate  them," Emerson said.
"I'd hear the calls coming in, and I'd listen to his pitch.
He'd  call some guys every day with information and say, 'Call us collect if you have  stuff for us.'
He was trying to compromise them.
Some fell for it, some didn't.
But  if [Security] hooked a guy, they'd try to brainwash him with their conspiracy  theories."
One secret of the NCLC's success with police departments, as with Third World  intelligence agencies, was the "pyramiding" of intelligence data.
Through their  phone sweeps Security members might find out, say, that the Revolutionary  Communist Party was planning a demonstration in city X.
They would call their  favorite Red Squad detective in that city and offer him information from their files  on the RCP.
Next they would call a detective in city Y, pass on to him anything of  interest they had learned from the detective in city X, and warn him that the RCP  might be planning nationwide terrorism.
Whatever this detective told them in  return, they would swap along with the previous item to a third detective in city Z,  thus rapidly building up their fund of tradable information without having to leave  their desks.
This tactic sometimes worked because the LaRouchians were at least pretending  to meet a real need.
Police intelligence officers in, say, Portland and Chicago  didn't have the time or resources to systematically exchange esoteric background  information on radical sects.
The LaRouchians thus could offer their services as  a clearinghouse, pretending to have vast resources of their own.
When a civil liberties group sued the Los Angeles Police Department's former  Public Disorder Intelligence Division (PDID), seeking to halt its alleged abuses,  local NCLC members popped up as fanatical police supporters.
They launched a  smear campaign in 1980 against leaders of the Citizens Commission on Police  Repression (CCPR), including its founder, Linda Valentino.
The LaRouchians  "made our lives miserable," she said, "They passed out, it must have been, a     quarter of a million leaflets, accusing us of terrorism and drug pushing."
The  leaflets listed the home and work phone numbers of activists involved in the suit.
"For days, we received harassing calls," Valentino said.
"I got obscene calls at  home in the early morning hours."
The leaflets were filled with blatant anti-Semitism, charging that the Israelis, the  Lubavich sect of Hasidic Judaism, the Jewish Defense League, Simon  Wiesenthal, and a Jewish city councilman, Zev Yaroslavsky, were all in a plot to  destroy the PDID so that "Israeli dopers" could take over.
One leaflet bore the  title "Smash the 'Kosher Nostra'-Defend the LAPD."
Said another; "If your child's  mind is eaten away by PCP provided to him by Meyer Lansky's drug runners, or  if the mayor of your city has his legs blown off" by a JDL hit squad, "the person to  blame is Zev [Yaroslavsky]."
The leaflets were authorized and paid for by  LaRouche's 1980 presidential campaign committee.
Similar accusations were  printed in IL, which solicited advance orders for an "in-depth special report"  analyzing the backgrounds and motives of the plaintiffs in the CCPR suit.
Meanwhile, Security prepared for the Los Angeles police a special dossier on  Yaroslavsky, including blatantly false accusations against other local and national  Jewish leaders.
According to Jeff Cohen, the former ACLU attorney who represented the  plaintiffs, the PDID had extensive direct dealings with the LaRouchians on  intelligence matters.
Cohen took the depositions of PDID officers who admitted  that the NCLC's local Security man, Tim Pike, had given briefings at police  headquarters.
Cohen subpoenaed PDID intelligence booklets that included  articles from IL and New Solidarity.
Detective Arleigh McCree, head of the LAPD bomb squad, met frequently with  Pike in the early 1980s and also chatted on the phone with New York Security  staffers.
McCree, who died while attempting to defuse a bomb in 1986, told  reporter Joel Bellman in a 1981 interview that he provided the LaRouchians with  tips as well as receiving information from them.
A 1982 Security notebook, provided to federal prosecutors by Charles Tate,  contains alleged tips about Israelis in southern California from a detective in the  "Israeli mafia unit."
The conversation is described under the heading "Calif.
LAPD  contacts."
Mordechai Levy, a Jewish militant who infiltrated the LaRouche  organization from 1980 to 1984, was working for Security in Los Angeles at the  time.
He says he examined copies of law enforcement files that Tim Pike kept in  a cabinet in the NCLC's Vermont Street office.
"Tim boasted he got them from  the PDID," Levy said.
The files related to radical groups of the 1960s and 1970s,  including the May Day Tribe, the FALN, the Brown Berets, and the Jewish  Defense League.
"Pike had Xeroxes of the mug shots, surveillance logs,  correspondence between the FBI and local law enforcement," Levy charged.
The LaRouchians wooed former Los Angeles police chief Ed Davis when he was  running for the state senate in 1 980.
He spoke at a meeting of the NCLC's  National Anti-Drug Coalition and gave interviews to LaRouche publications.
An  interview conducted by Jeffrey Steinberg appeared in War on Drugs.
The  headline called Davis the "Drug Fighter of the Month."
He was quoted as saying  that President Carter "philosophically was a drug pusher."
Davis recalled in a  1 988 phone interview that some California conservatives at the time regarded the  LaRouchians as a "counterforce" against leftists.
He said that a wealthy  campaign contributor had urged him to meet with them, but that he cut them off  upon realizing that they were not legitimate conservatives.
Chicago's police department was another major target.
In 1979-80 the  LaRouchians waged a smear campaign against Mayor Jane Byrne, who had  launched a reorganization of the department.
"The police work is moving along  extremely well," said a memo from the NCLC's Chicago office, indulging in typical  exaggeration.
"There is a recognition of the [National Anti-Drug] Coalition as the  vehicle to destroy Byrne from the standpoint of countering her police shakeup."
The memo then cited a "series of conversations" with police officials, including a  top Narcotics Division cop who supposedly "hates Byrne's guts."
It also described  efforts to organize support within the police unions and fraternal organizations.
The adopt-a-cop tactic backfired in New York City, where Security staffers sought  out Detective John Finnegan of the Intelligence Division.
Because of his  reputation for dogged tracking of leftists in the 1960s, they figured he would be  sympathetic to their rightward tilt.
Finnegan recalled that "they'd like to talk to you  all day, going back to the Renaissance.... I used to meet with them at Police  Headquarters."
But while dutifully maintaining contact, Finnegan and other  members of his unit (who remembered quite well the era of Operation Mop Up)  prepared reports on the NCLC's new psychology, tactics, and goals, including its  anti-Semitism, Their reports were far ahead of what other law enforcement  agencies and the media were saying about the LaRouchians.
As the years  passed, Finnegan (now retired) became increasingly concerned about their  activities.
It was he who first persuaded Patricia Lynch of NBC's First Camera to  focus on the LaRouchians in 1983-84.
Lynch describes Finnegan as an "unsung  hero" in the unmasking of LaRouche's conspiratorial network.
The LaRouchians in the early 1970s had the standard Marxist attitude toward the  police.
They were actually shocked when Communist Party members responded  to Operation Mop Up's savage beatings by asking for police protection.
New  Solidarity said the CP represented "police socialism" reminiscent of Russia's  Father Gapon during the 1905 revolution.
But the LaRouchians themselves began to seek police help during clashes with  United Auto Workers members in several states in 1975.
The violence was  mostly the NCLC's own fault.
In a basic scenario repeated over and over, they  showed up at plant gates with leaflets naming union officials or rank-and-file     workers as drug pushers, homosexuals, or Communists.
One leaflet said of a  Buffalo UAW member: "He can't go home to his wife with the smell of sperm on  his breath.
.
.
so he sleeps in parks...." The NCLC leadership claimed this was a  powerful new technique to appeal to the workers' unconscious minds, but the  only result was dozens of assaults on the leafleters.
In 1971-72 the LaRouchians had provoked similar assaults by standing in front of  Communist Party meeting halls and calling those who entered CIA agents,  counterrevolutionaries, and "house niggers."
LaRouche had then goaded his  followers into participating in Operation Mop Up to get even with their attackers.
But the clashes at plant gates were something different: LaRouche hardly could  mop up the giant UAW.
However, his followers did the next best thing by running  to the police to get their assailants arrested.
This was justified by the belief that  the latter were all fascists, social fascists, CIA agents, drug pushers, and  terrorists.
Robert Greenberg, later the editor of Investigative Leads, was allegedly involved  in one attempt to set up UAW members for arrest.
An affidavit filed by his  comrade Theodore Held, in a lawsuit between the NCLC and the UAW, stated  that when Held, Greenberg, and another NCLC member went to GMC Truck and  Coach in Pontiac, Michigan, they expected trouble because of previous incidents.
Held brought a camera.
When several angry auto workers approached,  "Greenberg motioned to me....As the men stepped into the street I photographed  them."
Held then described how the auto workers chased them off, with one man  delivering a "flying kick" to their car.
"I then drove to the Pontiac police station,"  Held continued, "and filed complaint No. 393271.... I developed the picture I had  taken of the men and Detective Peters took it to the plant the following Tuesday  and made the identification."
Robert Greenberg and other Security staffers also developed a more  sophisticated method for manipulating the police.
They compiled hundreds of  Investigative Leads articles, including false or exaggerated charges of illegal  activity by their opponents.
"They had this cynical attitude," Mordechai Levy said.
"They thought, 'Why waste time going after an enemy when we can get the cops  to do it for us?'
A lot of what they put in Investigative Leads they knew was a total  lie."
In fact, it was just another example of LaRouche's hypothesis of the higher  hypothesis, in which reasoning loses all touch with empirical reality in the service  of a higher "natural law."
The earliest documented example of this false-witness tactic occurred in 1974.
The LaRouchians approached the FBI with a fabricated story about an NCLC  opponent, James Retherford, who had taken his small daughter from her  LaRouchian mother and fled New York to save the child from being raised in a  cultish environment.
Hoping to manipulate the FBI into searching for them, the  Security staff falsely claimed that Retherford was in contact with Weather  Underground fugitives.
Although the FBI failed to take this story seriously, the     LaRouchians tried again, targeting otiier opponents.
FBI documents released to  NCLC members under the Freedom of Information Act reveal that LaRouche  emissaries made eleven visits or phone calls to FBI offices between May and  July 1976 to present allegations about various leftists and that this was followed  by further extensive contact.
The FOIA documents, over 5,000 pages, proved so  embarrassing that the NCLC went to court to get them removed from the FBI  reading room.
Yet the NCLC had to admit in court papers that it had "cooperated  with the FBI and other federal and local law enforcement agencies" by providing  information on the "terrorist activities" of persons associated with the Institute for  Policy Studies, a left-wing Washington think tank, and the Repression  Information Project, a research collective that had published a pamphlet critical of  LaRouche.
In mid-April 1977, two weeks before a mass demonstration against nuclear  power at the Seabrook nuclear reactor site in New Hampshire, two Boston area  NCLC leaders-Larry Sherman and Graham Lowry~met with Lieutenant Donald  Buxton of the New Hampshire State Police to outline alleged plans for  antinuclear violence by environmentalist groups.
Buxton filed a report treating the  allegations as worthy of serious consideration and described the two  LaRouchians as "very well informed gentlemen."
A copy was obtained by the  Clamshell Alliance and made public shortly after the peaceful demonstration.
The  NCLC also took its allegations about the Clamshell Alliance to the FBI.
But an  April 28, 1977, FBI memorandum said the NCLC had apparently "fabricated" the  information in an attempt to disrupt the demonstration "and cause New  Hampshire officials unnecessary problems."
The LaRouchians kept trying.
One infiltrated a 1979 South Hadley,  Massachusetts, planning meeting for another round of Seabrook demonstrations.
He reported back to Security that it was "one of the most anal, turd-piling, hair-  splitting New Left meetings it has been my displeasure to witness."
Nevertheless,  his report included a detailed account of the plans under discussion.
Although the  report contained no evidence of any plans for violence, the LaRouchians told the  Boston Globe and law enforcement officials to expect violence.
Once again, no  violence occurred.
The LaRouchians used the false-witness tactic in 1981 against an enemy they  hated even more than the environmentalists-the Yippies.
To the LaRouchians,  the Yippies were the symbol of everything evil-long-haired potheads who hung  out at rock concerts, had no respect for Beethoven, and made constant trouble  for LaRouche.
They had picketed his headquarters with the banner "Nazis Make  Good Lampshades" and on several occasions placed crank calls to Steinberg  and Goldstein from pay phones.
Aron Kay, the Yippie "pie man," was plotting to  land a mushroom pie in LaRouche's face at the earliest opportunity.
Security  prepared a series of "Dope Dossiers" on Kay, Abbie Hoffman, and other Yippies.
A New Solidarity editorial, "Cleaning Up the Filth," described them as "gutter  scum" and announced that the dossiers were "being supplied to the New York     City Police Department and otiier law enforcement agencies."
The contents of  the dossiers were oriented toward inducing the police to investigate the Yippies  for possession or sale of marijuana.
The LaRouchians were well aware that  marijuana possession was low on the police list of priorities, but suggested that  the police would thereby find evidence of Yippie involvement in terrorism and  other serious crimes.
LaRouche already had developed a general philosophy about this.
In a 1979  memo addressed to "key police and security-intelligence agencies" on how to  deal with supposed "terrorists" in the "rock-drug counterculture" (an allusion to  the Yippies), he claimed that such people are "highly vulnerable" to arrest  inasmuch as they live "in significant part in either a criminal or semi-criminal  mode of life."
He suggested that their activities as protesters and NCLC  opponents could be countered by using "arrests for drug violations" to  "destabilize" their "political infrastructure" and gather "most useful material" about  their political activities.
But in 1980 the tables were turned.
A college student friendly to the Yippies  decided to launch a one-man crusade to "destabilize" and gather "most useful  material" about the LaRouchians themselves.
Thus did the Security staff  encounter Mordechai Levy, a kind of Prince of Provocateurs, who would cause it  almost as much trouble as Roy Frankhouser.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Twenty-five  An Agent of Chaos   In the middle and late 1970s some NCLC members still worked at jobs in the  outside world.
Believing it to be dominated by the enemy, they naturally kept their  eyes and ears open.
Occasionally they gained useful information.
A LaRouchian  physician working at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx in 1974 learned about earlier  links between the Lincoln Detox Program--a drug-free acupuncture treatment  facility for heroin addicts--and the Black Liberation Army.
Subsequent NCLC  reports on the BLA helped convince police departments that the LaRouchians  might be worth listening to.
A woman in the organization gained a job in Drexel Burnham's international  economics division.
While trying to ferret out information about its links to the  mythical Dope, Inc. conspiracy, she picked up valuable information on gold  trading that was incorporated into NCLC economic intelligence reports.
She also  acquired a knowledge of Drexel's economic models, which LaRouche and his  aides reworked into the so-called LaRouche-Riemann economic model.
Gail Goerner Kay, wife of Security staffer Robert Kay, used family connections to  obtain a secretarial job with the Council on Foreign Relations.
To the  LaRouchians the CFR was one of the world's chief sources of evil, and Kay was  encouraged to stay in the job for several years while concealing her NCLC  connection.
Her greatest coup was to attend a meeting of the secretive  Bilderberg Society, an organization of top European and American bankers and  industrialists that, in the eyes of conspiracy theorists, is even more sinister than  the CFR.
When William Bundy, editor of the CFR's Foreign Affair magazine,  learned that Kay was a Mata Hari for LaRouche, he was astounded.
"It's like the  CIA getting an agent into the Politburo," he told The New York Times.
But as life inside the NCLC became more tightly disciplined and prone to  hysteria, it precluded any long-range infiltrations of the enemy camp.
"Anyone  who went undercover would be leaving the 'controlled environment,' " observed  one former Security staffer.
"LaRouche would lose his hold on them."
Members  gradually were withdrawn from outside jobs.
Some top staffers became  extremely nervous when the boss of the young woman at Drexel invited her to  dinner.
They feared he might be planning to turn her into a double agent by  seducing her.
Hysterical memos were circulated at NCLC headquarters, and she  was removed from the danger zone.
Ironically, the LaRouchians began to function in the outside world~as long as  they took it in small doses-more effectively than ever.
Some visited the National     Security Council and made favorable impressions.
Some comported themselves  well on radio talk shows.
But this was done only while they wore the persona of  an NCLC "organizer" or "intelligence operative."
When they attempted to pose as  ordinary people, they weren't very good at it.
Furthermore, their paranoid belief  structure made some types of snooping almost impossible for them.
Although  they were skilled at making undercover calls to the Yippies, they were reluctant  to spend much time hanging out with people whose lifestyles were radically  different from their own.
Thus they had to build a network of paid and unpaid  informers.
This brought them into association with the likes of Mordechai Levy.
They were on the lookout for such people.
Mordechai was a California State University undergraduate when he first  encountered the LaRouchians in 1980.
With a near-genius IQ, and vivid  fantasies, he was bored with his accounting studies.
His great passion in life was  to fight Nazis.
At the age of thirteen he had joined the Jewish Defense League.
He became a great telephone-booth crank-call artist, attempting to strike terror  into the hearts of Klansmen and Nazis across the country.
White supremacists  complained incessantly in The Spotlight and other hate sheets about the  dangerous "terrorist" Levy.
Soon after Mordechai began talking with the LaRouchians, they asked him to  work for them as a secret operative.
He jumped at the chance to become a mole  in their ranks.
Given the code name "Leviticus," he carried out various  assignments in Los Angeles and made frequent trips to New York on direct  orders from Steinberg, Goldstein, and West Coast Security chief Tim Pike, This  relationship lasted for four years, with the LaRouchians paying tens of thousands  of dollars for his meals, airfare, and hotel rooms.
To maintain his cover.
New  Solidarity occasionally attacked him as a Zionist terrorist.
Mordechai was supposed to collect intelligence on LaRouche's enemies and run  operations against them.
What he actually did was compose fictitious information  for Goldstein and Steinberg while passing along tips about LaRouche's plans to  journalists, the ADL, and Jewish community leaders.
The tips sometimes weren't  worth very much, for in espionage textbook fashion the LaRouchians tried to feed  disinformation through him.
But Mordechai developed a shrewd understanding of  their psychology and began to provoke NCLC security alerts with his warnings of imaginary dangers.
In 1982 he cooperated with the Manhattan district attorney's  office in an investigation of them.
After dropping his double-agent role in 1984 he  agreed to be a witness in the Boston prosecution of LaRouche for obstruction of  justice.
The LaRouchians often pressured Mordechai for information on leftist sects.
"I'd  go off somewhere and pretend to make a phone call," he said.
"Then I'd come  back and tell them anything that popped into my head.
I read a lot of leftist  papers, so I could make it sound convincing."
When they brought him to New  York to run operations against various enemies, he set up a command post in a     West Side hotel, and sat around chatting on the phone with friends under the  guise of contacting "agents."
He invited the Yippie "pie man," Aron Kay, to the  hotel for a free meal at LaRouche's expense.
This was supposed to be part of a  deep operation against the Yippies.
Aron couldn't show up, but Mordechai let two  other Yippies crash in the hotel room.
They had to leave at seven in the morning  because Goldstein was expected at eight.
Mordechai and Goldstein often met in  Ratner's on Delancey Street or Bernstein's on Essex Street--the "mole" and his  "control officer" plotting their next deployment against the ADL in a kosher  restaurant!
Hundreds of pages of NCLC Security documents from the years 1980-84  describe debriefings of "Leviticus" and "Mark Levine."
These documents confirm  that the information he provided them was mostly innocuous or fictitious.
He  convinced Goldstein that he had a pipeline into Mossad, and told him to watch  out for "Colonel Kiffel," "Henry Duvall," "Carlos the Jew," and other infamous  assassins who had sworn to kill LaRouche.
At one point he claimed to have seen  a secret U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency report on Helga, allegedly concluding  that she was an East German agent.
His description of the document was  extremely convincing, and for good reason.
He often stayed at the Bleecker  Street apartment of investigative journalist A. J. Weberman, who had several  filing drawers full of old Pentagon and CIA documents obtained under the  Freedom of Information Act.
Mordechai studied these and his imagination did the  rest.
Mordechai never met Roy Frankhouser and despised him as a racist.
But he and  Frankhouser inadvertently ended up in a curious indirect relationship as  pranksters.
According to Charles Tate's testimony in Frankhouser's 1987 trial,  this was the result of their "bid[ding] up against each other about how much they  knew."
A Security staffer "would call Mr. Frankhouser and report what Mr. Levy  had told them without saying it was from Mr. Levy.
And Mr. Frankhouser, of  course, in order.
.
.
to show that he was not caught napping, would have to  augment this fantasy with.
.
.
yet more.
If there were five assassins according to  Mr. Levy's account, there had to be six according to Mr. Frankhouser's account.
And this would go back to Mr. Levy, who would, you know, have a dozen."
(This  tactic was also adopted by "the Major," who apparently had figured out the magic  equation: the greater the fear of assassination, the higher the consulting fees.)
Some Security staffers were skeptical of Mordechai's stories all along.
After he  told them an especially wild fantasy, they demanded he come to the New York  office for a lie detector test.
Mordechai went to a private investigator to learn how  to beat the machine.
The PI told him to eat five orders of Chinese mustard, take  antihistamines to dry out his nasal passages, then stay up all night.
But  Mordechai never had to try this method: The LaRouchians canceled the test.
Mordechai's manipulation of Goldstein was the key to his success.
It was  Goldstein who bailed him out and restored his credibility whenever one of his     stories didn't cliecl< out.
IVIordecliai believed tliat Goldstein had "unconscious"  doubts about the LaRouche organization and therefore needed him around as  reassurance: "He would look at me, an Orthodox Jew with a yarmuike, and he  would say to himself, 'If Mordechai can follow LaRouche, LaRouche must be  okay.' "
In dealing with Goldstein, Mordechai learned to pick up cues and anticipate  expectations like a vaudeville mind reader.
The transcript of a 1981 debriefing  that the LaRouchians passed on to the NYPD Intelligence Division contains a  good example:   LEVY: And another [anti-LaRouche conspirator] named William....   GOLDSTEIN: Corey?
LEVY: Greenberg.
GOLDSTEIN: Greenberg, Maxwell Greenberg.
LEVY: Maxwell Greenberg, that's right.
I said William.
.
.
the guy   who's in the police commission, very big.
See, everything's on   levels, it's layers, you know....   Mordechai was forced not only to juggle contradictory stories but to control his  temper when LaRouche aides told him that only a million and a half Jews died in  the Holocaust or that the "rich Jews" would have to go into camps after  LaRouche's ascent to power.
(Charles Tate says Mordechai was not  exaggerating about Security's anti-Semitic atmosphere.
"I heard the most  execrable things about rich Jews," Tate recalled.
"They'd say the problem with  World War II was that the wrong Jews were gassed.")
In 1982 Mordechai broke with the JDL and formed his own Jewish Defense  Organization (JDO).
California newspapers published a photo of a scruffy gun-  toting crew with Mordechai looking something like Captain Hook.
He was soon  too busy to continue his double life with the LaRouchians.
In 1984 he revealed  his deception and attacked them openly.
This obliged Goldstein and Steinberg to  settle ideological accounts with him, but they couldn't admit they'd been taken in  so completely.
Their rationalization took the form of a published report, "Mordechai Levy: The  Profile of Mossad Hit Teams," contained in a larger study of the worldwide  "Israeli mafia" conspiracy.
According to this report, Mordechai had been sent into  the NCLC as an ADL agent, but Goldstein had succeeded in partially "turning"  him by teaching him about Rembrandt and Heinrich Heine.
Mordechai had thus  started giving the NCLC genuinely valuable information until the ADL put him  through "severe trauma" to turn him again.
Once this happened, once Leviticus  the double agent became Leviticus the triple agent, he became "extremely  dangerous," a walking time bomb of fanaticism and psychosis.
Yet earlier,  Goldstein had shown almost superhuman skill as his control officer: "The ability  of EIR counterintelligence personnel to detect and utilize Levy's psychological     conflicts," the report boasted, "produced a higher.
.
.
accuracy of information from  Levy than any other law enforcement or intelligence apparatus-even the Israeli  Mossad--could have achieved without the use of mind-altering drugs or torture."
The example given of this accurate information was Mordechai's account of a  multileveled assassination plot against LaRouche, supposedly set for December  31,1 981 , involving the Yippies, the ADL, the Israeli government, financier Max  Fisher, a command post in London, and something called the AJEX/JWV Special  Action Committee, or Group 62.
Supposedly by revealing this plot Levy had  saved LaRouche's life.
But Goldstein showed a certain insight and even a hint of humor when he  suggested that Mordechai could best be described as a "chaos agent."
Goldstein  listed the New York phone booths from which Mordechai supposedly made his  crank calls.
He pointed out, accurately, that the calls were mostly made from  "booths in, or just outside," various kosher restaurants.
Security also managed to attract informers who were motivated by grudges or  cupidity and who possessed, or were willing to gather, information of real  substance.
One example of these not so golden souls was Bruce Bailey, a tenant  organizer well connected among New York leftists and anti-Zionists.
According to  former LaRouchians (including Charles Tate, who dealt directly with him), and  substantiated by court records and internal NCLC reports, Bailey had numerous  secret meetings and phone conversations with Security staffers between 1979  and 1984.
The present author was the number one target.
I had worked with Bailey in  community politics in the 1970s, but ended up on his list of ideological enemies,  A February 6, 1984, report of an interview with Bailey conducted by Tate  (entered into the NCLC computer under the access name "King, Dennis," ID  1044r, Code: Red, Sector: Security) suggests that once one becomes an  informer it is difficult to restrict the range of one's informing.
While discussing his  grudge against me, Bailey ranged afield to gossip about his various past and  present acquaintances on the left.
His nastiest sexual slurs were leveled at a  woman who had testified against him in a civil fraud proceeding several years  previously.
He also offered sexual gossip about a woman who had helped  organize a picket line in front of his Columbia Tenants Union to protest its anti-  Semitism, One person mentioned was the well-known civil rights activist and folk  singer the Rev. F. D. Kirkpatrick.
Although Kirkpatrick was one of Bailey's closest  political associates, the report accused him of belonging to a "touchy-feely cult"  and described him as a "bejeweled and dashikied" figure who "likes to think of  himself as a local celebrity."
Bailey's information was passed on to "Clay" (Roy  Frankhouser) by Paul Goldstein, whose report (ID 0625m) of his daily chat with  "Clay" noted that Bailey's information "provides [the] basis for cross-gridding"  various political activists.
Security also used the services of Grant Duay III, a writer of occasional pieces for  the New York City News, an obscure Manhattan gay weekly.
In late 1982, Duay  first showed up at the League for Industrial Democracy, where I was working as  a researcher.
Duay asked to meet with the director.
Arch Puddington, and  showed him an article he had written attacking the NCLC as a right-wing political  cult.
Duay became a frequent visitor to the LID offices, and also showed up at a  lecture I delivered on cult brainwashing, ostensibly to cover it for his newspaper.
Puddington and I became suspicious when we heard that Duay was making calls  to journalists on the LaRouche beat all over the country.
Our suspicions  increased after Michael Hudson, a creditor suing the LaRouchians for  racketeering in New York federal court, received a call from Duay (a total  stranger to him) just before an important court appearance.
Upon learning from  Federal Election Commission records that Duay had made donations to several  LaRouchian election campaigns, we stopped talking to him.
The full story of Duay's relationship with the LaRouchians was later revealed by  Charles Tate, one of whose Security duties had been to supervise Duay.
According to Tate, Duay's assignments included interviewing LaRouche  opponents under false pretenses, gathering background material on them, and  monitoring anti-LaRouche public meetings.
Tate said that although Duay had  been mildly sympathetic to LaRouche's ideas, he had never been willing to work  for free.
"He'd bring in a tape recording, we'd give him twenty bucks," Tate said.
This was confirmed by an NCLC Security logbook containing handwritten reports  of conversations with informants in the spring of 1984.
The notebook had Duay's  name and phone number on the cover and contained a distorted summary of an  actual phone conversation between Duay and Puddington.
In my own conversations with Duay he always seemed obsessed with  uncovering what he said were secret links between various left-wing groups and  the National Man-Boy Love Association (NAMBLA).
But the truth will out.
On  March 23, 1986, he was arrested as an alleged member of a sex ring that  produced, sold, traded, and distributed child pornography.
His arrest occurred at  Gay Treasures, a Greenwich Village porn shop where he worked as a clerk, after  undercover agents from a federal and local task force purchased videotapes of  men having sex with young boys.
Duay subsequently pleaded guilty to obscenity  in the third degree, receiving a fine but no jail sentence.
Members of the NCLC informer network, both fake and real, expected their  identities to be kept secret, but the LaRouche organization demonstrated an utter  disregard for their wishes.
According to Tate, Bailey expressed a strong fear of  public exposure, yet Jeffrey Steinberg (in a 1984 deposition in LaRouche v. NBC)  gave away Bailey's name when it was clearly unnecessary to do so.
(In the same  deposition, he invoked "national security" to avoid naming several other sources.)
Bailey became the target of newspaper articles that quoted from the deposition.
Steinberg also neglected to protect Grant Duay's name.
And LaRouche, in a     subsequent deposition in tine same case, blabbed about botli IVIordecliai and Roy  Frankliouser witliout forewarning tliem.
IVIordecliai subsequently received  physical threats from Jewish militants unaware of his double game.
Those who "traded" information with the NCLC also experienced problems.
There were lax security procedures about the handling of confidential reports, so  that copies of documents describing secret conversations with police officers in  various cities kept falling into the hands of journalists such as Chip Berlet or me.
Also, Security staffers felt no compunctions about double-crossing people they  traded with, by peddling information on them to third parties.
For instance, in the  early 1980s Security staffer Ira Liebowitz cultivated contacts in the Church of  Scientology's Guardians' Office for the alleged purpose of exchanging  information on mutual enemies.
(Scientology, like the NCLC, has a long history of  aggressive tactics against its opponents.)
Arnon Harari, New York director of  Scientology's Office of Special Affairs (the new name for the Guardians' Office),  recalled meeting at least twice with Liebowitz.
Meanwhile Investigative Leads  produced a special report on Scientology for police intelligence units, while EIR  misquoted from a Liebowitz-Harari conversation to falsely suggest links between  Scientology and narcotics trafficking.
The NCLC Security staff, through its remarkable range of deceptive tactics, has  built up over a fifteen-year period one of the largest collections of private political  intelligence data in the United States.
According to defectors, these files contain  blackmail-style information on public figures and details on the activities of both  left-wing and right-wing political dissidents.
Hundreds of thousands of Americans  are mentioned in these files, and thousands are profiled in some depth.
Much of  the information is false, malicious, and defamatory, but some of it is accurate and  potentially devastating to the lives of the targeted persons.
When the FBI and  Virginia authorities raided LaRouche's headquarters in October 1986, they carted  away more than 425 boxes of files.
The media had the impression that these  were mostly financial records, but the offices raided included those of the  Security staff, and the files seized contained computer discs on which vast  quantities of Security data were stored.
The FBI thus came into possession of a  major portion of the "LaRouche files."
Apart from the details about political  radicals and the rumors about the sex lives of public officials, these files contain  evidence of extensive NCLC dealings with government and police officials and  corporate executives throughout the country.
Many of these individuals would be  extremely embarrassed if their dealings with LaRouche should ever become a  matter of public record.
It is symptomatic of the media's curious blindness on the  LaRouche issue that no one has raised the question of what the FBI intends to  do with this intelligence bonanza.
But whatever the answer, the seizure of these  files represents a certain poetic justice.
The LaRouchians set out to duplicate J.  Edgar Hoover's infamous blackmail files, but their own files, once in the FBI's  hands, led to the indictment of LaRouche himself for obstructing justice.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Twenty-six  To Roy Cohn, with Love     Security's most amazing operation was its smear campaign against New York  attorney and power broker Roy Cohn.
It was a classic case of Freudian reaction  formation — LaRouche, the Red-baiter of the 1980s, going after Cohn, the former  aide to Joe McCarthy; LaRouche, the propagandist for organized crime, going  after Cohn, its attorney and fixer; LaRouche, who lives like a millionaire but last  paid income tax in 1973, going after Cohn, who evaded the IRS through similar  tactics for most of his adult life.
No two antagonists ever deserved each other  more.
The war on Cohn was triggered indirectly by an investigative series I wrote for  the Manhattan weekly Our Town in 1979.
These were the first articles to call  attention to LaRouche's neo-Nazism.
Former NCLC members say the series  freaked out the national office staff.
Especially affected were Jewish members,  who had rationalized the turn to neo-Nazism via various self-deceptions,   LaRouche moved quickly to blunt the psychological effect on his followers and  launch a counterpunch.
The first step was to announce that the articles signaled  yet another assassination attempt against him.
Previously, such announcements  had led to security alerts and mobilizations, whipping up enough hysteria to keep  his followers from thinking about things he didn't want them to think about.
But for  a security alert to be scary, the enemy must be scary — not just a neighborhood  newspaper but a giant global conspiracy.
Naturally that conspiracy had to include  Jews and drug traffickers.
In a broadside entitled "We'll Destroy the Zionists  Politically," LaRouche announced: "I am a chief target . . . because I have had  the guts to identify the enemy boldly and directly.
Anyone attacking me in the  way that the Zionist rag Our Town did is fully in cahoots with.
.
.
Dope, Inc."   LaRouche filed a $20 million suit against Our Town, which retained Roy Cohn as  its defense attorney.
When Security discovered that Colin had represented Our  Town on several previous occasions, they blamed him for the articles.
The NCLC  issued a leaflet with a picture of Cohn and the caption: "Roy Cohn, the mobster  who wants to see LaRouche dead."
It described him as a major figure in the  above-mentioned Dope, Inc. (a mythical Jewish drug cartel), and one of the  plotters behind the assassination of John F, Kennedy.
As the weeks passed,  NCLC ascribed more and more importance to Cohn in their global conspiracies.
This propaganda was too hysterically worded to have much effect on the general  public, but inside the NCLC it effectively diverted attention.
By constant repetition     LaRouche linked Our Town's articles to the name, face, and odious reputation of  Cohn, He even claimed Cohn had personally written the series.
This was a trick  LaRouche had described well in "Beyond Psychoanalysis" (1973): If one is faced  with dangerous thoughts, one can "block the process of assimilation" by the  "commonplace ruse" of slapping a nasty label on them.
The Our Town articles  called for a chain-reaction label: Cohn, McCarthy, Mafia, Faggot.
This was  effective because many of LaRouche's followers were former leftists with a gut  hatred of McCarthyism, and Cohn was McCarthyism's premier living symbol.
The  NCLC members thus could regard themselves as the successors of the  Rosenbergs, suffering jolt after jolt from Roy Cohn's Our Town, Roy Cohn's New  York Times, and Roy Cohn's Anti-Defamation League.
On another level the anti-Cohn rhetoric reinforced the NCLC's anti-Semitism at  the very moment when outsiders were harshly questioning it.
One of the oldest  ploys of anti-Semites is to focus on an individual Jew who is genuinely sinister,  and to describe his crimes in a manner which suggests that criminality is an  innate Jewish trait.
The LaRouchians had frequently railed against Meyer  Lansky, the financial wizard of organized crime, and long-deceased Jewish  gangsters of the Prohibition era such as Bugsy Siegel of Murder, Inc.
But such  figures had always been too remote from the mainstream Jewish community to  be convincing symbols.
Cohn, however, was a power in New York politics, with  ties to many prominent and respectable Jews.
The LaRouchians thus could  allege that he represented both a Jewish conspiracy and behavior patterns  typical of rich Jews.
(In fact, Cohn was an aberrant personality who could have  come from any ethnic group.
Neither of his two historic partners in demagoguery,  McCarthy and J. Edgar Hoover, was Jewish, and his most sinister clients were  Italians.)
Cohn's unrepentant McCarthyism, his homosexuality, his role in selecting judges  in New York, and his notoriously unethical behavior before the bar all became  grist for the propaganda mill, topped off by his media image as the meanest man  in New York — an image he carefully cultivated to enhance the price of his legal  services and the effectiveness of his courtroom theatrics.
LaRouche transformed  this into Cohn, the meanest Zionist \r\ New York, the personification of the  alleged inner meanness of Zionism itself.
NCLC members then joined in the  Cohn-hating much as the fictional denizens of George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-  four ra\\\e6 for hate sessions directed at the scapegoat Emmanuel Goldstein.
Critical thinking within the NCLC national office was almost completely blocked,  and no defections occurred for over a year.
But LaRouche's troubles in the outside world were by no means squelched.
The  New York Times echoed Our Town's findings in a frontpage series, and the story  spread to newspapers in New Hampshire, where LaRouche was making his  Democratic primary presidential bid.
He tried to counter the reports by claiming  he was being libeled by Cohn and "the mob" as a result of his antidrug stance,  but such protestations were not effective with the general public, and he received     only 2,300 votes in the primary.
He tlius faced a new dilemma: He had built up  Cohn as the enemy, but by the logic of this myth, Cohn had caused LaRouche's  humiliating New Hampshire defeat.
All LaRouche had been able to do to Cohn  was fulminate.
Some form of revenge would have to be extracted if LaRouche's  reputation as a dangerous fellow was not to melt away.
A stroke of luck gave LaRouche the means to extract his revenge in an  extraordinary manner, boosting his followers' view of themselves as a potent  force and sending a message to the Establishment: Don't mess with Lyndon  LaRouche if you have anything to hide.
This lucky event was the convergence of  the LaRouchians' rage with that of Richard Dupont, a former lover, business  associate, and law client of Cohn's.
Richard was the co-owner of Big Gym, a gay  health club that had been evicted from its Greenwich Village quarters in 1979.
Previously Richard had dreamed of purchasing the property, but it ended up in  the hands of a real estate developer.
Richard blamed this on Cohn's having  made a deal behind his back, and he started to talk to anyone who would listen.
He said that Cohn had been the silent partner in Big Gym, and that Cohn's  personal assistant, Russell Eldridge, had been assigned to skim off cash and  procure young men from among the club's clientele to service Cohn's insatiable  sexual needs.
Through the years Cohn had double-crossed many clients, from rich elderly  ladies through mobsters, and always with impunity.
But in Richard he found a  victim with an almost superhuman thirst for revenge and a cunning to match his  own.
Richard was determined to bring down his powerful betrayer, and was  willing to run whatever risks were necessary.
He contacted many of Cohn's past  victims in preparation for a lawsuit.
He waged a campaign of hundreds of crank  calls to Cohn and various of his associates at their homes and offices.
He wrote  "Roy Cohn Is a Fag" up and down the sidewalk in front of Cohn's town house.
He  sent fire trucks and police on a false alarm to Cohn's Greenwich, Connecticut,  estate, disrupting a dinner party that included Mr. and Mrs. Donald Trump, the  Baron and Baroness di Portanova, and Mrs. S. I. Newhouse.
When Cohn was in  the hospital recovering from plastic surgery, Richard slipped into the room, wearing a white coat and with a stethoscope around his neck, to remonstrate  with Cohn and give him a bouquet of wilted flowers.
Richard also developed a remarkable network of informants in Cohn's office and  among Cohn's lovers.
He knew where Cohn was at virtually every moment.
Secretaries, switchboard operators, and business underlings all helped him, as  did Cohn's lovers.
His most important source was George Dowling, who ran the  skimming operations at Cohn's porn theaters and parking lots.
Dowling despised  Cohn and provided Richard with information of the most sensitive nature.
Richard  then called up the head of real estate at the Rock Island Railroad in Chicago and  told him how Cohn's associates were skimming off and double-ticketing  approximately $350,000 a year from parking lots leased from the railroad.
The  Cohnheads promptly lost the franchise.
Said Kalev Pehme, a former Our Town editor wlio l<new Ricliard well and often  dealt with Cohn on news stories: "Richard had a profound understanding of  Cohn's closet homosexual self-hate.
He constantly preyed on this and on Cohn's  vanity.
It was the cumulative effect, one little thing after another, and suddenly  you had this powerful figure breaking down because Richard sent him wilted  flowers.
Richard just kept hitting him like a prizefighter, little blows, you're woozy,  then you're gone."
Pehme attributed Richard's success in gaining the cooperation  of Cohn's lovers to this same psychological understanding.
"Richard would help  them get over Roy.
They were often innocent types, not boys, but men, with  battered egos, no self-esteem, completely dominated and used by Cohn.
Richard  would commiserate with them in the most astonishing compassionate way.
He  developed tremendous rapport with them, and they told him everything."
In early 1980 a friend of Richard's was handed an NCLC anti-Cohn leaflet in front  of Bloomingdale's.
She passed it on to Richard, who asked Pehme about it.
Pehme warned him that the LaRouchians were a cult, but Richard figured any  enemy of Cohn was worth meeting.
He soon recognized that, cult or not, they  had the resources to do what he and other Cohn victims had not been able to do  on their own.
As to the LaRouchian ideology, it simply was of no interest to him.
Over the next few months Richard met on numerous occasions with Paul  Goldstein and other Security staffers, providing them with devastating information  about Cohn's personal life, finances, and professional double-dealings.
The  result was collected and published in a magazine.
Now East, whose two issues  were devoted almost entirely to stories about Cohn and other attorneys at Saxe,  Bacon, Bolan & Manley, as well as their clients.
Goldstein, Richard, and members of the New Solidarity editorial staff plotted out  the first issue and its follow-up at Richard's apartment on West Eighth Street.
Richard insisted that there be no anti-Zionist rhetoric, which he knew would  destroy the magazine's effectiveness.
A LaRouchian staff artist drew  pornographic cartoons depicting Cohn in flagrante, while other cartoons were  plagiarized and adapted from The New Yorker.
(Richard supplied the captions.)
The advertisements were taken without permission from legitimate gay  publications.
The entire production was written, laid out, typeset, printed, and  paid for by the LaRouche organization, under Goldstein's direct supervision.
Yet  its masthead listed a fictitious editorial staff and the address of a telephone  answering service used by Richard.
For Richard, it was sweet revenge.
For the LaRouchians, it was a weird inversion  of their experience with Our Town.
The latter had dared to bare the LaRouchians'  dark secret, their closet Nazism.
Now the LaRouchians were laying out Cohn's  secrets.
As soon as the press run of the 52-page magazine was completed at LaRouche's  PMR Printing Company, the bundles were whisked off to Staten Island and  stored in George Bowling's garage.
From there, Richard, his friends, and  members of the Security staff distributed them around Manhattan.
The first  copies were passed out during New York's Gay Pride parade in June 1980.
Copies of this and the subsequent issue were distributed to Cohn's clients and  colleagues, to Manhattan's federal court judges, and to the city rooms of the  metropolitan dailies.
Stacks were left at East Side restaurants frequented by  Cohn, such as "21" and P.J. Clarke's.
Charles Tate recalls being assigned to  pass out copies at a meeting of a conservative Catholic group attended by Tom  Bolan, one of Cohn's law partners.
The first issue's lead article was an "Open Letter to the Gay Community" bearing  Cohn's name, in which he purportedly confessed his homosexuality and  apologized for selling out Big Gym.
Other articles provided details about the  skimming operations at Cohn-linked businesses and a combination of real and  fictitious stories about his glitzy clients such as Buddy Jacobson, Gloria  Vanderbilt, Steve Rubell of Studio 54, Baron and Baroness di Portanova, and  Gloria Steinberg, estranged wife of financier Saul Steinberg.
In addition.
Now  East included the names of young men who allegedly had slept with Cohn,  details about his health, and a drawing of a graveyard with his name on a  tombstone.
The second issue followed in November, with a cover drawing labeled "Roy Cohn  . . . Fairy."
It included articles about a male model alleged to be Cohn's latest  lover, Cohn's tax-evasion methods, and how he double-crossed several clients  including an organized-crime boss.
Veteran Cohn watchers say that much of the information in the two issues was  accurate, some was exaggerated, a few things were concocted.
But even the  false material bore an aura of believability (and hence a great capacity for  embarrassing and humiliating Cohn) because of the skillful way in which it was  interwoven with the factual material — the secrets that no one else had ever dared  print about New York's vaunted "legal executioner."
The reported incidents of  professional misconduct were far more outrageous than those which would lead  to Cohn's disbarment in 1986, shortly before his death from AIDS.
In addition, the  magazine discussed Cohn's silent partnership in a Staten Island parking lot  skimming operation run illegally on city property by Enrico Mazzeo, former real  estate manager for the city's Department of Marine and Aviation.
Mazzeo already  was the target of a Brooklyn federal strike force probe.
In November 1983 he was  found dead in a car trunk in Brooklyn, the victim of a gangland-style execution.
Cohn was desperate to stop the flow of information to Richard, but there were  just too many inside sources.
When John LeCarre's Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy  was dramatized on television, Dupont and the LaRouchians began to refer to  these sources collectively as "Geraldine" — after LeCarre's "Gerald the Mole."
Cohn went to his old antagonist IVIanliattan District Attorney Robert IVIorgentliau  witli a desperate request for lielp.
In October 1980 Richard was indicted on  thirteen criminal counts, mostly acts of petty harassment that, under ordinary  circumstances, a district attorney wouldn't waste his time on.
The Village Voice  noted that Morgenthau and Cohn had seemed very chummy at a party the night  before Richard's 6 A.M. arrest.
The Voice believed the indictment said more  about Cohn's power in New York politics than about Richard's criminality.
Morgenthau's office was well aware of the involvement of the LaRouchians with  Richard.
Assistant DA Harold Wilson called Our Town about them on several  occasions in August and September 1980.
Yet none of them were indicted.
Richard's attorney, John Klotz, believes a political decision was made to let them  off: "Just after Richard's arraignment I went to Wilson, I said, 'Let's work  something out, we'll help you get LaRouche.'
Wilson said to me, 'After I convict  Dupont, I will immunize him and put him in front of a grand jury.
I don't need your  help.' "
That second grand jury was never convened.
Former associates of Cohn and  LaRouche say that an agreement was arrived at: LaRouche would stop  harassing Cohn, and there would be no reprisals against LaRouche.
Now East  ceased publication, and New Solidarity scaled back its attacks on Cohn.
According to Anne-Marie Vidal, a former member of the NCLC inner circle,  LaRouche aides paid a substantial sum to Cohn to introduce LaRouche to  important people and persuade the media to leave the NCLC alone.
According to  law enforcement sources, such a deal was indeed made, but Cohn never  delivered what he had promised.
Dupont's trial in the summer of 1981 lasted five weeks.
Wilson never once  mentioned the defendant's LaRouche connection or the involvement of the  LaRouchians in Now East, although its distribution was included among the  charges against Dupont.
This was an extraordinary omission.
LaRouche's  probable involvement had been mentioned repeatedly in The Village Voice.
Bringing his name into the case could only have strengthened Wilson's hand,  especially with Jewish members of the jury.
Nevertheless, the prosecution  maintained that Dupont published and distributed Now East alone.
Defense  counsel Klotz's questioning of Richard brought out that he was dyslexic, never  graduated from high school, had no experience in newspaper layout or any other  aspect of newspaper work, and could not have produced the magazine on his  own.
This left a hole wide enough to run a bulldozer through.
All Wilson had to do  was ask Richard who his accomplices were, and then claim that Richard, far from  being a little guy seeking justice, was a sinister ally of the infamous LaRouche.
But this was no ordinary trial.
It was a political trial in which the rea/ prosecutor  was not Wilson but Roy Cohn, disguised as the star witness.
And Cohn had  gained a vested interest in keeping LaRouche's name out.
Everything about the wilted-flowers trial was potentially explosive: a homosexual  version of the TV series "Dallas," with Cohn as J.R., that provided a rare window  into the profoundly disturbed world of power in New York.
But Judge Bentley  Kassal's rulings, the prosecution's tactics, and Cohn's influence with the media  kept that window mostly closed.
If it had been opened, the public would have  learned much about high-level New York political corruption, foreshadowing the  Donald Manes-Stanley Friedman-Mayor Koch scandals of the mid-1980s.
But  editors at the metropolitan dailies allowed the trial only minimal play.
Even The  Village Voice only nibbled at the edges.
There were no TV cameras on the  courthouse steps.
People v. Dtvponf disappeared into the Memory Hole.
The jury found Richard not guilty on both of the felony counts, but guilty of six  misdemeanors.
To convict him of crank phone calls to Cohn cost the taxpayers  over $250,000.
But when Michael Hudson, a victim of straightforward loan fraud  by the LaRouchians, went to the DA's office in 1982, he was told his complaint  was too complicated (unlike the sexually-politically-psychiatrically entangled  Dupont case!)
.
Indeed no prosecutor seemed to be willing to take on LaRouche.
In 1979 a New York Times editorial had urged a probe of his nonprofit Fusion  Energy Foundation.
But the State Attorney General's office, which is in charge of  monitoring nonprofit organizations, took no action.
It was one of the few times  this publicity-conscious office ever ignored The New York Times.
Meanwhile, LaRouche's NCLC developed Manhattan-centered scams in the  early 1980s that — according to subsequent indictments and civil RICO suits —  would rip off the public for tens of millions of dollars.
Even as this was beginning.
The Village Voice and Our Town published articles pointing out LaRouche's  financial improprieties and links to racketeers.
Neither Morgenthau's office nor  State Attorney General Robert Abrams' office nor the office of the U.S. Attorney  for the Southern District of New York showed any inclination to look at these  accusations.
The first real probe in 1984 had to begin in Boston.
Abrams only  went after LaRouche in the summer of 1986, when Roy Cohn was safely on his  deathbed and several state attorney generals from Alaska to Florida were  already on the case — investigating a conspiracy that began in Abrams' own  backyard.
Charles Tate says the Security staff believed in the early 1980s that the soft  treatment the NCLC received in New York — including Mayor Koch's speak-no-  evil attitude toward LaRouche mayoral candidate Melvin Klenetsky in 1981 — was  due to a fear of NCLC smear campaigns.
The NCLC's negative personal  information about political figures, he said, was actually in files "in alphabetical  order" in the Security office.
Tate added that he personally interviewed an alleged  former intimate friend of Brooklyn DA Elizabeth Holtzman and also received  information on her from a paid informant.
The aim was to convince prosecutors  and politicians that "they don't need an enemy of this type," Tate said.
In the 1987 Frankhouser trial, Tate testified that whenever LaRouche couldn't  find damaging information "he would invent something."
Indeed the LaRouchians  followed an age-old smear tactic: Look at a person's lifestyle and figure what  might be true, then publish your speculations as fact.
A certain percentage of the  time you will hit the bull's eye, and the victim will freak out thinking you know  more than you do.
If it isn't true, much of the public will believe it anyway, and the  victim will heartily wish you'd just shut up.
If you're doing this in an exceptionally  corrupt political environment like Koch's New York, where most public figures  have secrets to hide, you're guaranteed a large measure of immunity from libel  suits.
To gain a powerful intimidating reputation, you just have to be right once in  a big way.
The LaRouchians were right in a stupendous way with Now East, and  after that no one in New York seriously went after them for years.
Following Dupont's trial but prior to sentencing.
Judge Kassal received a letter  from Roger Stone, regional director of Ronald Reagan's 1980 presidential  campaign.
Sent at Cohn's request, the letter was apparently intended to urge a  stiff sentence for Richard.
Stone complained that Richard had once called to ask  him about his "personal relationship" with Cohn, then sent him flowers and  several copies of Now East.
Kassal delayed sentencing while ordering Richard to  seek psychiatric treatment.
However, the following June he imposed a sentence  of four consecutive years for Richard's nonviolent prankish misdemeanors — a  punishment virtually without precedent in such a case and regarded as incredible  by some journalists who covered the trial.
A few months later, Kassal was  elevated to the Appellate Division.
While the case was being appealed, Richard was ordered to Rikers Island to  begin serving his sentence.
Believing accidents had been known to happen to  enemies of Cohn, and that Rikers Island was a good place for such an accident,  Richard went underground and spread the word that the DA's detective squad  had better not come near him — he had AIDS.
(This actually was not true.)
Several months later Richard went to former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey  Clark, who arranged for him to turn himself in.
When the appeal came up, Kassal  disqualified himself.
The remaining judges agreed it was indeed peculiar that  Dupont had been sentenced to jail for passing out a magazine on the street, a  constitutionally protected activity.
They dismissed that count, but let the rest of  the conviction stand.
The Cohn-LaRouche war might have ended after Richard was convicted, save  for Helga LaRouche's car being involved in a near accident in West Germany.
The LaRouchians smelled an assassination attempt.
Frankhouser's Mister Ed  gallantly offered to protect Helga and suggested that the CIA was taking the  threat very seriously.
Mordechai Levy said that the infamous assassin "Henry  Duvall" was involved and that Roy Cohn was obviously behind "Duvall."
The  freak-out began when Goldstein went to Richard to ask if he could find out  anything from inside Saxe, Bacon.
Sensing an opportunity to resurrect Now East, Richard confirmed Levy's story.
The LaRouchians were furious over Cohn's alleged "double cross."
They  responded with an attack even nastier than Now East — hundreds of thousands of  copies of a bogus New York Times supplement, "Profiles of the Times," designed  to look like the Sunday book review section but devoted to further exposing Cohn  and his associates.
Tate says it was Richard's "brainchild," and that Richard  devised "what to say and how to say it."
On a Saturday night in October 1 982,  two members of LaRouche's Security staff took "Profiles" around to dozens of  newsstands in Manhattan and Oueens in a rented van.
Wearing dark glasses,  they represented themselves as Times employees and instructed the  newsdealers to insert the supplement in the Sunday papers.
Before the Times  management could react, it had reached tens of thousands of readers.
"Profiles" contained alleged quotes from former lovers of Cohn, including three  men who later died of AIDS.
It also contained a fake Barbara Walters interview  with Cohn in which he purportedly admitted his homosexuality and discussed in  some detail his inner emotional life and illegal dealings with various business  associates.
The piece was written with subtlety and verve.
After buying the Times  that Saturday night, I was halfway into the Walters-Cohn interview before it  dawned on me: Richard and the LaRouchians had struck again,   A later edition of the Times carried a disclaimer, and many of the "Profiles"  copies were never distributed.
Yet the prank turned out to be far more effective  than Now East.
It was reported on the wire services and in daily papers across  the country, raising the issue of Roy Cohn's homosexuality with millions of  readers.
New York's daily papers on Monday reported the indignant howls of  eminent persons.
Cohn declared "Profiles" a "total lie" and vowed to seek "every  available" legal remedy "to see that something like this does not happen  again.
.
.
to someone less capable of self-defense."
Republican gubernatorial  candidate Lew Lehrman, himself a target in "Profiles" along with Mayor Koch,  said that "so outrageous a personal attack has never occurred in an election in  New York State politics."
Leonard Harris of the Times said that it was "the poison  Tylenol technique applied to newspapers," while another Times executive, John  Pomfret, promised that the paper would "pursue vigorously an investigation of  this outrage in consultation with law-enforcement authorities."
The Times's veteran Nazi hunter Howard Blum was assigned to track down the  LaRouche connection.
Morgenthau announced the launching of an investigation  by Harold Wilson and a team of detectives.
A grand jury was convened to  examine evidence that the LaRouchians had violated forgery laws.
But all this turned out to be mere bluster.
Although the district attorney's detective  squad raided LaRouche's printshop on November 16, it failed to simultaneously  raid the typesetting firm, located at another address.
When the police arrived at  the printshop, a member of LaRouche's legal staff was already there,  forewarned.
Part of the story came out in 1986 in tine Boston credit-card fraud case, wlien FBI  special agent Richard Egan testified regarding information on the bogus Times  supplement received from government informants.
The NCLC Security staff had  "managed to have some kind of leak of information from the district attorney's  office which allowed them to destroy the [printing] plates" before the search  warrant could be executed.
Security chief Paul Goldstein, who was Morgenthau's  chief suspect, had been sent on a "European vacation."
Former LaRouche  bodyguard Lee Fick had run into Goldstein in Wiesbaden, and Goldstein had told  him, "Lyn wants me here because it's too hot in New York."
LaRouche aide  Jeffrey Steinberg had asked Klansman Roy Frankhouser to go to the printshop  and "lean on" an employee whom Steinberg was worried might talk to the police.
Former police officer Phil Perlonga, a Metro employee who served as a  LaRouche bodyguard in 1982-83, says that the LaRouchians asked him to  shadow Richard, whom they were fearful might make a deal to cooperate with  the authorities.
"I followed him all over the fur district," Perlonga recalled.
He also  said the LaRouchians asked him to conduct surveillance of the DA's office to see  if Richard went in or out.
For several weeks, the LaRouchians were extremely jumpy.
LaRouche was living  in a town house on Sutton Place.
Perlonga, in charge of a security detail, recalls  that someone phoned in with a report that Morgenthau's detective squad was on  its way to arrest LaRouche.
LaRouche's in-house Security people immediately  "came downstairs, put on bulletproof vests, and checked their .45s. I took the  Metro guys outside, and told them to stay there and if the police came, to tell  them there were crazy people armed inside and that they should communicate  through me.
I then went back inside; I was prepared to blow LaRouche's guys  away if they fired on police officers."
But the DA's squad never arrived: The report  was a concoction phoned in from Los Angeles by Mordechai Levy.
"I made it all  up," Levy said.
"It was part of my plan to drive them crazy."
In spite of their paranoia, the LaRouchians made some shrewd moves during the  "Profiles" uproar.
New Solidarity issued a threat as to what Cohn could expect if  the case ever came to trial.
The article began by noting that he had decided not  to sue for libel.
This supposedly reflected his "reticence to make himself and his  business and sexual dealings the subject of what could only be one of the  country's most highly publicized trials . . . especially given what this news service  knows to be Cohn's many crimes."
The article quoted LaRouche as saying that  "Cohn has more enemies than a queen bee has eggs."
If the DA ever brought  the "Profiles" case to trial, the defendants would "drown [Cohn's] political career  in a flood of publicity and gales of laughter."
The LaRouchians also targeted Morgenthau.
Security notebooks from November  1982 show that they assiduously pursued negative information about the DA and  his wife, former New York Times reporter Lucinda Franks.
According to one  notebook entry, a source at a drug treatment center told them a preposterous     story that Morgenthau owned whorehouses.
Another entry described an  undercover phone call to one of Franks's colleagues.
They then flooded  downtown Manhattan with leaflets devoted to standard LaRouche charges — e.g.,  that Morgenthau was a tool of the "Israeli mafia" and that his wife was a "terrorist  sympathizer."
(She had indeed spent time with the Weather Underground, but for  the purpose of writing a book about them.)
One leaflet, passed out in front of Morgenthau's office to make sure he received  the message, contained a LaRouche zinger transcending the usual NCLC  rhetoric.
It alleged that Morgenthau had "sat on the biggest banking scandal of  the past decade, American Bank and Trust's 1976 failure," and that he had  "prosecuted clerk-level fall guys while top bank officers and  manipulators.
.
.
received immunity in a $45 million rip-off of depositors."
Details  followed, based in part on long-forgotten articles in Barron's and New York  magazine by Richard Karp, a freelance financial reporter.
Karp told me the  LaRouchians had called him at the time and questioned him closely about the  American Bank scandal and related matters.
He recalled that they seemed  extremely well informed.
The LaRouchians boasted in a December 10, 1982, New Solidarity article by  Linda de Hoyos (who had been involved in the production of Now East) that they  were engaged in an effort to "unnerve" Morgenthau and catch his office "off  guard."
A December 14 article by Security staffer Vin Berg in Executive  Intelligence Review made the threat explicit: "Morgenthau has been involved in  many covert operations against LaRouche in the past, but this one is the riskiest,  because it is being conducted openly.
...By stepping into the light of day in this  way, Robert Morgenthau has made himself, his financial and political associates,  and his record in office matters for intense public scrutiny."
By early 1983 the DA's office suspected that Goldstein and two aides were the  chief culprits.
Yet by December 1983 there was still no action.
Harold Wilson, in a  telephone interview, attributed the delay to a federal court lawsuit the  LaRouchians had filed against the DA that year.
But the investigation may simply  have been spiked.
John Klotz says he approached the DA's office with an offer  that Richard would give testimony in exchange for some consideration on his  own sentence but the DA spurned the offer.
Was the DA's office once again  letting the LaRouchians off the hook to protect themselves and other powerful  people from further embarrassment?
Wilson claims that his office didn't make a  deal with Klotz because they didn't believe Richard could give "direct, competent,  truthful evidence."
But this statement is belied by Richard's competent and  truthful (if rambling) testimony about Cohn in his 1981 trial, as well as the  extraordinary accuracy of his published information on Cohn.
The Village Voice  quoted Klotz shortly after the "Profiles" hoax: "The last investigation [the Now  East one] was botched by Morgenthau's office because they didn't go beyond  Dupont to look at the financing and publication of Now East.
The New York  Times is paying the price for that with this [second] reprehensible publication."
Certainly the DA's double standard for big guy LaRouche and little guy Dupont  bore more than a little similarity to the double standard in the American Bank  case.
According to NCLC defectors and Security employees, LaRouche's top aides  alluded to a new rapprochement with Cohn that supposedly resulted in the  abandonment of the "Profiles" investigation.
LaRouche and Cohn had associates  in common who would have wanted this high-profile war stopped, even if Roy  had to eat humble pie.
Cohn was the attorney for Fat Tony Salerno, and Fat  Tony, as would be alleged in a federal indictment in 1986, had his hooks deep  into Teamster boss Jackie Presser, LaRouche's number one hoodlum ally.
In  fact, the LaRouche-Cohn war ceased for good.
There were no more major  revelations, although New Solidarity would gloat over Cohn's AIDS a few months  before the major media dared mention it.
Goldstein returned from his "vacation"  to continue his trickster campaigns with greater impudence than ever.
Meanwhile, The New York Times abandoned its own investigation of the  "Profiles."
With the exception of a brief item on the DA's raid, nothing more was  ever published.
The Village Voice noted that the Times "seems curiously reticent  on a matter so deeply offensive to its own integrity."
But the Times had also been  curiously reticent in covering the Dupont trial or, for that matter, anything relating  to Roy Cohn's corruption of the New York political process in the late 1970s and  early 1980s.
Nevertheless, LaRouche had played close to the edge with his "Profiles of the  Times."
Shortly after the DA's raid on the printshop, he packed up and moved to  Virginia, although NCLC headquarters remained in New York for two more years.
In a 1984 affidavit, he stated that he had not "travelled to New York since  December of 1982 and will not travel to or visit New York City" because of the  "security situation."
However, he continued to dabble in New York political  intrigues from the safety of his country estate.
In 1983 a bitter enemy of  Morgenthau, former New York City medical examiner Dr. Michael Baden, met  with LaRouche in Leesburg.
Baden had been removed as medical examiner in  1979 in part because of pressure from Morgenthau.
The LaRouchians had  championed Baden in several articles, depicting him as a victim of machinations  by the Dope, Inc. cartel.
He was accompanied by his wife.
Dr. Judianne Densen-  Gerber, formerly of Odyssey House, who had spoken at LaRouchian anti-drug  rallies, and by Dr. John Grauerholz, a former colleague of Baden's in the Suffolk  County, New York, medical examiner's office.
That same year Grauerholz and other medical professionals allied with Baden  became involved in a campaign to discredit Morgenthau and Baden's successor.
Dr. Elliot Gross, over their handling of the death in police custody of a young  black graffiti artist, Michael Stewart.
Grauerholz served as a source for The New  York Times in a series critical of Gross and was later honored at a dinner held by  a political coalition that was seeking justice for the Stewart family.
The Times and  the political coalition suffered considerable embarrassment when the New York     Post revealed that Grauerholz was a full-time follower of LaRouche.
The  campaign against Gross and Morgenthau meanwhile developed anti-Semitic  undertones in the black community, thanks to the newsletter of a group that  called itself African Activists in America.
The LaRouchians did their bit by alleging  that Gross and Morgenthau were part of an anti-Michael Baden conspiracy  headed by the "Israeli mafia."
An article by LaRouche's Upper West Side snitch  Bruce Bailey was circulated, alleging that blacks were held in a Zionist "death  grip."
(After multiple probes on the local, state, and federal levels.
Gross  eventually was cleared of any wrongdoing in the Stewart case.
In October 1987,  Mayor Koch dismissed him from his post, citing administrative ineffectiveness.)
By June 1986 the LaRouchians were under investigation in over a dozen states  for loan fraud.
New York NCLC members had participated in soliciting many of  these loans at a time when their organization's regional office was located right  down the street from Brooklyn DA Liz Holtzman's office.
But New York  prosecutors, despite the strong sentiment against LaRouche in the Jewish  community in the wake of his organization's Illinois campaign victories, lagged far  behind states where public sentiment and the demands of justice were not nearly  as strong.
Our Town publisher Edward Kayatt ran an editorial calling for sacking  both Morgenthau and Abrams if they didn't move on LaRouche.
The untouchable  Morgenthau ignored it.
Abrams, however, spoke from the floor at a Jewish  Community Relations Advisory Council gathering in Manhattan the week the  editorial appeared, apologizing for his office's failure to exercise vigilance and  asking anyone who had been ripped off by LaRouche to come forward.
Shortly  thereafter his office began contacting many victims of LaRouche's fund raising.
The LaRouchians figured they could once again use their embarrassing-  revelations tactic.
On August 4, New Solidarity published an article about how  certain Abrams aides were involved in the gay rights movement.
A week later an  article by Michelle Steinberg and LaRouche's chief spokesman, Ed Spannaus,  suggested that the NCLC might be in possession of potentially embarrassing  information received from Cohn shortly before his death.
Pointing out that Cohn  had wanted on his deathbed to pass on some information about public officials,  they speculated that this information was from Cohn's "blackmail files" and that  "Cohn's knowledge of the homosexual weaknesses of some.
.
.
as-yet-unnamed  public officials was not academic."
They boasted about the devastating quality of  some of the NCLC's past insider information from circles around Cohn ("some of  the very charges published in the 'Profiles' insert sheet were the basis for a  series of civil actions that led to Mr. Cohn's ultimate disbarment").
They also  alleged that in my forthcoming book (this one) I would demonstrate that "Cohn  and LaRouche ultimately reached a coming to terms" and that "Cohn became an  unofficial legal consultant to LaRouche."
Finally they suggested that "some of the  infamous Cohn files" might have "quietly slipped into the hands of some of  Lyndon LaRouche's closest associates in rural Virginia."
But whatever information tine LaRoucliians possessed was not equal to quasliing  a felony investigation in the 1986 atmosphere in which New Yorkers wanted  something done about LaRouche.
It had been easy to evade indictment for  pranks like Now East and "Profiles," but loan fraud running into tens of millions of  dollars was no prank.
In March 1987, Abrams' office indicted fifteen LaRouche  aides.
Among them were Now East writer Linda de Hoyos, who had boasted in  New Solidarity in 1982 about unnerving Morgenthau, and Edward Spannaus, co-  author of the August 11,1 986, article about the alleged "Cohn files."
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
PART SEVEN: Conspiracies and  Code Words   If I were the head of the llluminati, I certainly would not call it by that  name.... I'd call it the John Birch Society, and advertise it as an  organization opposed \o the llluminati.
That way I'd be able to rope  in all the people who are against the llluminati and use them as  unwitting dupes.
This is such a plausible idea that if the llluminati do exist, they must  have thought of it already.
--ROBERT ANTON WILSON   Chapter Twenty-seven  LaRouche's Purloined Letter   American journalists are generally unaccustomed to dealing with the subtleties of  extremist ideology.
Electoral contests between Republicans and Democrats do  not reflect the range of views found in, say, French or Italian elections, which  span the spectrum from Communist to fascist.
Even mainstream ideologies in the  United States have become little more than pieties accompanying the TV glitz.
It  is thus hardly a surprise that American journalists have difficulty understanding  what LaRouche is about.
They assume he will use ideas and words in as  straightforward a way as they themselves do.
When he doesn't, they become  confused and tend to dismiss his ideas as a "puzzle," a "mystery," or "difficult to  characterize," although they concede that he appears to be some kind of  "extremist."
They conceal their confusion and intellectual laziness with jokes  about LaRouche the kook who thinks the Queen of England pushes drugs,  entirely missing the real meaning of his quip about the Oueen.
LaRouche knows that his writings mystify most readers, but he provides little  hints for them.
For instance, he suggests that they approach his writings in the  spirit of Edgar Allan Poe's famous detective.
Monsieur Dupin.
"The 'secrets' of  my actions," LaRouche says, "are of the same order as the purloined letter of the  Poe tale, or the open secrets of nature-it is a matter of knowing not only where,  but how to look."
To learn how to look, one must begin with LaRouche's conspiracy theory of  history, which highlights the role of deception and concealment in the     transmission of ideology tlirougli tine centuries.
In "The Secrets Known Only to  the Inner Elites," LaRouche claims that he and his followers represent a 3,000-  year-old faction of "Neoplatonic humanists" locked in mortal struggle with an  equally ancient "oligarchy."
To avoid repression by the dominant oligarchy, the  humanists through the centuries have concealed their ideas in much the way that  an espionage agent conceals his identity.
Indeed, the humanist is a combination  of spy and underground revolutionary organizer.
LaRouche cites the example of  St. Augustine, who supposedly adopted Christianity as his cover for organizing a  united front against the oligarchy.
The concept of "cover" is also the basis of LaRouche's views on philosophy and  literature.
The wisdom of the humanist conspiracy supposedly is concealed in the  writings of Plato, Dante, Machiavelli, etc.
Their method is like a play within a play,  using one philosophy as a smoke screen for another.
The disciple thinks he is  studying harmless philosophy A, but he is subliminally absorbing subversive  philosophy B. By the time he gains full insight, he is so firmly hooked that he  won't betray the truth to outsiders.
Of course, many students never gain full  awareness, and indeed these may be the most useful: In LaRouche's theory of  espionage the best agent is often the one who is unaware that he is an agent-  the zombie agent, the Manchurian candidate.
LaRouche believes poetry is especially useful as a means of communication  among agents because it "disallow[s] any literal or ordinary symbolic  significance" and "conjoin[s] predicates ambiguously so that only the  preconscious transfinite for such conjoined elements can be intended."
In plain  English: If you use ambiguous language, you can always deny what you really  meant if the authorities come after you.
Meanwhile your message can reach the  discerning few and you can continue to act on philosophy B while calling it  philosophy A.
As LaRouche, referring to his enemies, said in a 1978 speech: "It  is not necessary to call oneself a fascist to be a fascist.
It is simply necessary to  be one."
But LaRouche's theory of ideological deception also asserts something of a more  subtle nature: Through ambiguity and code words, it's possible to appeal to the  reader or listener's "preconscious mind" and thus lead him gradually into ideas  his conscious mind would otherwise reject.
So when LaRouche wrote in 1979  about "Machiavelli's" success in outwitting the "donkey censors," the word  "censor" was actually a pun referring both to political censors and to the censor  (superego) of Freudian theory.
A LaRouchian article in 1986, signed by none  other than "Machiavelli," made this point clearly: Euphemisms or code words are  "an artificial mechanism to avoid the moral shock effacing bestiality in its most  degenerate forms."
Although LaRouche portrayed this as a method used by  oligarchs rather than his favored humanists, he himself utilized the basic principle  in the mid-1970s to instill fascist ideas in his leftist followers.
As most of them  feared and loathed fascism, LaRouche could never have won them over without     code words and ambiguity to sliort-circuit tine moral sliock tliey would have  experienced if he had spoken frankly.
LaRouche was quite aware of what he was doing.
"Words and syntactical forms,"  he wrote, have customary meanings.
To elicit something beyond those  customary meanings, to express an idea that is "genuinely new," one must add  "a new meaning"--however subtle--to the "existing medium."
LaRouche made this  observation in The Case of Walter Lippmann (1977), which gave new meanings  to many "customary" terms.
For instance, "republican" was used over and over to  mean "fascist."
Lippmann, LaRouche's major theoretical work, also abounded in  multileveled puns that slyly alluded to various fascist and anti-Semitic ideas.
For  instance, LaRouche referred to the oligarchy as "nominalists."
Nominalism was  the medieval precursor of modern empiricism.
For LaRouche, it is a synonym for  "materialism"--the philosophy that anti-Semites accuse Jews of having developed  as a weapon against Christianity and Aryanism.
LaRouche's nominalism also  designates materialistic values~the alleged money consciousness of the Jews  and the alleged "bestial heteronomy" of the masses.
On a deeper level the term  refers to the "nominal Jews"~the "Jews who are not Jews."
In addition, since the  nominalist philosophy was closely associated with scholastic philosophers from  England (especially William of Occam), LaRouche can use it to cross-reference  his favorite anti-Semitic euphemisms: "British" and "British empiricist."
Such puns  aside, LaRouche has good reason to hate nominalism; It is a philosophy that  argues that words are only signs for things and have no independent existence-  it thus stands opposed to LaRouche's semantic tricks.
Ambiguity and puns are okay for some purposes, but a serious political  conspiracy also needs ideological precision.
LaRouche refers to "the 'codes' of  the Renaissance intelligence and conciliar networks."
These were not developed  as a mere academic exercise, he says.
"Certain qualities of ideas cannot be  communicated in any other fashion."
Here LaRouche is describing real history,  although in a distorted way.
For centuries political writers have used code words  or euphemisms to evade censorship and other forms of state repression.
In the  late nineteenth century, Russian revolutionaries employed an elaborate  "Aesopian" language to evade the czarist censors.
Poland's Solidarity trade  union in the early 1980s used code words to criticize the Soviet Union.
In the  Soviet Union itself, dissidents have seized on Mikhail Gorbachev's term glasnost  and transformed it into a euphemism for Western-style democracy.
In the United States, code language is a convenient tool for advocates of racism  and anti-Semitism.
They don't have to worry about being jailed for their ideas, but  they do have to use caution in communicating with those outside their ranks.
While laying out their argument they must avoid triggering a premature revulsion  or feeling of embarrassment in their audience.
They must also protect  themselves against the backlash from their ideas-negative press coverage,  social ostracism, or even physical assault from members of the targeted ethnic  groups.
Racists thus talk about "states' rights" in the South and "law and order" in     the North.
Anti-Semites call themselves "anti-Zionists."
Naturally, not all  advocates of states' rights or law and order are racists, nor are all critics of Israel  Jew-haters.
This is precisely what makes the code words so convenient.
West Germany outlaws overt neo-Nazi agitation.
Yet hundreds of neo-Nazi,  racial nationalist, and conservative nationalist groups have sprouted on German  soil since World War II, each with an intense desire to communicate various  forbidden or impolitic messages to the general public.
They do so in large part  through code words.
Political scientist Kurt Tauber, in his 1,600-page Beyond  Eagle and Swastika, describes the deceptive tactics of scores of such groups in  the first two decades after the war.
One militant youth league in the 1 950s was  called the Schiller Youth, although it engaged in activities more appropriate to the  Hitler Youth.
It is significant that LaRouche has founded a Schiller Institute, and  his wife speaks of bringing a SchillerzeitXo America.
Former LaRouche followers believe that the planting of code terms in NCLC  publications is a means of signaling old-style fascists around the world (the "old  humanist networks," as some LaRouchians call them) that the NCLC is  sympathetic to their aims.
One way this is done is by using occult buzzwords like  "Atlantis" and "Thule" to allude to the Aryan race and the Third Reich.
The  practice springs from the popular belief that Hitler and many of his top followers  were motivated by occult doctrines.
Cryptic references to this putative Nazi  occultism are easily recognized by those active in the secretive world of Western  European and South American neo-fascism as well as in U.S. white supremacist  groups.
LaRouche also has adopted various conspiracy theories of the Nazi and pre-Nazi  era long forgotten by everyone outside of hard-core anti-Semitic circles.
He uses  these theories in a sly form, referring to the "Babylonians" and the "British" rather  than the Jews.
This is not just sending signals; it is LaRouche's version of what  he calls the Renaissance intelligence "codes."
It enables him to evade the  "donkey censor" to discuss in print the core theories of Nazism: that the Jews are  the ancient enemy of the human race, that they are a separate biological entity,  and that they must be crushed in a final cataclysmic struggle.
Through this code  language, he is able to promote a neo-Nazi ideology in all but name yet remain  sufficiently respectable to gain meetings with high-level Reagan administration  aides and raise tens of millions of dollars a year from elderly conservatives.
LaRouche has shown his fellow fascists around the world how to have your cake  and eat it too.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Twenty-eight  Babylonians Under Every Bed     LaRouche's conspiracy theory of history is not just a means of indirectly  expressing neo-Nazi ideas.
It is also a psychological device that serves to  deepen the political paranoia within the NCLC and ultimately within the public the  NCLC strives to influence.
A paranoid belief system, if it is truly a totalitarian one,  strives to explain all of reality, since any holes in it would be a potential escape  hatch for the captive mind to liberate itself.
The paranoid ideology, whether  serving a cult or a totalitarian regime, must be a block of steel, not a slice of  Swiss cheese.
This means that the conspiracy theory--the basis of political paranoia-cannot just  focus on contemporary politics.
Ideally it should extend into every field of thought  and every period of history so that no matter what topic the captive mind thinks  about, it can only think about it in paranoid terms of us versus them (with "them,"  of course, being infinitely evil).
LaRouche's theory of the struggle between two secret elites is perhaps the  closest thing to a system of total multidimensional paranoia ever invented in the  United States.
It extends backwards in time tens of thousands of years, and also  forward into man's future among the stars.
It extends into every sphere of culture:  music, art, poetry, philosophy, science-indeed, into every aspect of human  existence.
It descends into sexuality and the unconscious mind and even deeper  into the genes and chromosomes, the level of racial struggle.
It also ascends  above history into a neo-Platonic supersensible realm.
It has its source in the  geometric structure of reality.
If one is a LaRouchian, one's belief system literally  cannot be escaped; the struggle is everywhere.
The lynchpin of LaRouchism, as of more primitive systems of paranoia, is the  fear and hatred of an evil and secretive force.
Although LaRouche calls this force  the oligarchy, he really means the Jews.
Given the total paranoia of the system,  the fear and hatred veers into neo-Nazism.
The latter is not an acceptable  ideology in today's America and so must remain partially disguised to evade the  "donkey censor."
LaRouche's conspiracy theory therefore becomes a double  system: First, it extends the NCLC's paranoia and hatred into every aspect of  thought; second, it attacks the supposed forces of evil in a euphemistic manner.
This dual nature of the theory should be kept in mind as we step by step  "decode" the bizarre formulations in which it is couched.
If LaRouche had been a traditional anti-Semite, he might have based his  conspiracy theory on the Protocols of the Elders ofZion, the infamous forgery     that purports to document a nineteenth-century conspiracy to establish a Jewish  world government through various diabolical intrigues.
But the Protocols is too  narrow in scope for the purposes of total paranoia and also is too thoroughly  discredited by scholars for practical use among most educated people.
LaRouche hesitated, however, to reject out of hand one of the most effective Big  Lies of the first half of the twentieth century.
So he compromised: The Protocols,  he said, has a "hard kernel of truth" but is only of limited significance-it  represents only a small piece of the real conspiracy of the "oligarchy."
LaRouche's oligarchy makes the Elders of Zion seem mild.
It supposedly has  dominated the world for tens of thousands of years with unremittingly evil  motives.
Indeed, LaRouche accuses it of periodically killing off a large portion of  the human race through famines and plagues.
Today it is supposedly plotting a  New Dark Ages, which will include nuclear holocaust, the massive spread of  AIDS, Zero Growth, and total bestial heteronomy.
Why the oligarchs should want a return to the Dark Ages when they obviously  could accumulate more wealth and live more comfortably under conditions of  modern capitalism is not quite clear.
But LaRouche assures us that they  destroyed all past societies they captured, from Atlantis through Rome.
Three  thousand years ago their headquarters was in Babylon.
After they engineered its  fall, they shifted their command post westward to Rome, then Venice, and finally  to London.
Again and again their poisons and daggers have defeated their  valiant opponents, the "humanists," who champion productive investment,  science, technology, and "citybuilding."
Unable to stop humanist networks, led by Benjamin Franklin and Friedrich Schiller, from launching the Industrial Revolution, the oligarchs struggled to slow  it down through their control of Speculative Capital, which allegedly feeds like a  vampire on Productive Capital.
But the oligarchs today are extremely worried  because Productive Capital has begun to link up with the powerful streamlined  humanist conspiracy represented by the NCLC.
It is unlikely LaRouche believes all this, but it provides him with the necessary all-  encompassing framework for his anti-Semitic mythology, giving it, even in a  disguised form, a virulence far more intense than if he had based it on the  Protocols alone.
As to the true identity of the oligarchs, this is revealed in  LaRouche's "Solving the Machiavellian Problem Today": They are the "anti-  human bestialists" and "parasites" who "cooked up the hoax called the Old  Testament."
In a subsequent article he openly calls them the "Jewish usurers"~a  "continuous and often dominant element" in oligarchical rule from Babylon  through the Middle Ages.
(LaRouche then throws up one of his characteristic  smoke screens.
Some people, he writes, have misinterpreted this dominant role  of the Jews in order to promote anti-Semitism.
Although he does not wish to be a  party to spreading such misguided views, he can't help it that the hoax is     bolstered by the "fact" that "some of the worst poisonings of the Catholic Church  were accomplished by converted Jews representing such families of usurers"!)
"The Secrets Known Only to the Inner Elites" is LaRouche's most thorough  account of his version of world history.
Apart from his schema of oligarchs versus  humanists, this work and other NCLC pseudo-historical treatises appear to  borrow heavily from the anti-Semitic "classics": Houston Stewart Chamberlain's  Foundations of the Nineteenth Century {^ 899), Oswald Spengler's Decline of the  l/Vesf (1918-22), Hitler's Mein Kampf {^ 925-26), Alfred Rosenberg's Myth of the  Twentieth Century {^930), and Francis Parker Yockey's Imperium (1948), as well  as assorted British and American Nazi tracts from the interwar years.
LaRouche's attacks on the evil "Babylonians," for instance, strongly resemble  theories found in Chamberlain, who claimed that the Jews of the Babylonian  Captivity rose to great influence over their captors, and that Babylon rather than  Jerusalem was the real headquarters of the ancient Jews.
Chamberlain even  remarked on the "Rothschilds" of Babylon.
This theory is popularized for  American white supremacists in pamphlets sold by the Louisiana-based Sons of  Liberty~for instance.
The l\/lerchants of Babylon by Rev. Bertrand L. Comparet,  which features a photograph of four bearded rabbis on the cover.
When  LaRouche denounces the "Whore of Babylon," the Ku Klux Klan knows exactly  what he means.
LaRouche also rails against the "Persian Empire" and "Persian agents" who  supposedly destroyed the ancient world.
Again this is not new.
Both Spengler  and Chamberlain claimed that the Jews and the Persians were linked in a  common conspiracy.
Spengler said the Jews actually dominated much of the  Persian empire, while Chamberlain described them as Persian puppets.
In  LaRouche's view the chief instruments of Persian-Babylonian infiltration of the  West (Greece and Rome) were the Dionysian cults and Isis worship.
(One  LaRouche disciple wrote that modern Israel is the "Zionist bastard" of Isis.)
Alfred  Rosenberg, Hitler's "philosopher" who was executed at Nuremberg, brooded over  Dionysius and Isis in a similar manner sixty years ago.
The Dionysian cults, he  said, were "racially and spiritually alien" to Aryanism, encouraging a frenzy based  on that of the "insanely possessed" King Saul of Israel.
As to Isis, Rosenberg  associated her with Africa, sexual promiscuity, and race mixing.
Approaching modern times, LaRouche shows more originality.
In the Middle  Ages the center of power moved to Rome, whose "merchant-usurers" were Jews  or converted Jews.
Led by the Pierlioni family, they supposedly seized control of  the papacy and squeezed Europe dry.
Next the Venetian oligarchy took its pound  of flesh during the Renaissance, after the decline of the Vatican oligarchy but  before the rise of the "British."
Throughout these long centuries, LaRouche teaches, the humanist forerunners  of the NCLC fought back continuously.
Many famous thinkers and poets were     secret members: Plato, Dante, Machiavelli, and Edgar Allan Poe, as well as  Franklin and Schiller.
But most important were the warlord humanists, the  champions of the Grand Design.
Not surprisingly, most of them marched their  conquering armies east.
The LaRouchians praise the legendary Pharaoh  Sesostris, who supposedly marched east to subjugate evil Babylon; Alexander  the Great, who marched east to crush evil Persia; and Timur the Great, who  carried out an early version of the Final Solution against the medieval  descendants of the ancient Persians and Babylonians.
LaRouche also expresses  reverence for the memory of Hassan ibn Saba, the "Old Man of the Mountain,"  who headed a medieval cult of assassins.
Hassan didn't march east, but he did  live in a castle called the Eagle's Nest--the same name as Hitler's mountaintop  lodge in Bavaria.
LaRouche wrote in 1 978 that if only the Old Man of the  Mountain were alive in Germany, he'd mop up left-wing terrorists in short order.
Of special significance in LaRouchian mythology is Frederick Barbarossa, the  medieval German emperor who marched east against the Slavs (and in whose  memory Hitler named his invasion of the Soviet Union "Operation Barbarossa").
The Wiesbaden branch of LaRouche's European Labor Party evoked Frederick  Barbarossa's memory in its 1978 manifesto calling for a new type of state in  Germany-- Der Rechtsstaat.
The NCLC's theoretical organ.
The Campaigner,  illustrated its translation of this document with a map of Central and Eastern  Europe labeled "Frederick Barbarossa's Great Design."
On the opposite page  was a map of the entire area included in the European theater in World War II,  with dotted lines going just about everywhere the Nazi armies went or dreamed  of going.
The caption underneath discussed the German Drang nach Osten  (drive to the east), but identified it with the German emperors rather than Hitler.
The dotted lines were said to be "European and Mediterranean Trade Routes."
LaRouche finds certain recurring patterns in history--the result of the oligarchs  using the same strategy of control again and again.
Ancient Babylon (dominated  as it was by rich Jews) concocted the "synthetic" religion of the Old Testament,  brainwashed the Jewish masses with it, and then sent them back to Judaea to  serve as a strategic military colony.
In the twentieth century, Britain (the new  Babylon, also dominated by rich Jews) brainwashed the Jewish masses with the  synthetic ideology of Zionism and sent them back to Palestine to serve as a  garrison state.
Another case is the career of Alexander the Great, who was reared as a Persian  agent but rebelled against his masters and took vengeance on them.
Likewise,  according to LaRouche, Hitler began his career as a "British" agent--and indeed,  as the German correspondent for The New York Times--but rebelled against the  British and drove them to Dunkirk.
Unfortunately, he lacked Alexander's humanist  resolve to finish the job.
A final example is the medieval Jewish usurers who purportedly used the Vatican  as their cover.
LaRouche says they charged such high interest rates that they     drove Europe into utter penury.
Weakened by starvation, tine masses succumbed  to tine Blacl< Plague.
In the same manner, the London-controlled International  Monetary Fund supposedly is driving the peoples of the Third World into  starvation, causing them to succumb to AIDS.
In his gloomier moments LaRouche worries that Western civilization will suffer  the fate of the Atlanteans, who supposedly showed great promise under the  leadership of scientist-astronomers until their society was subverted and  destroyed by the ancestors of the Babylonians~the evil magician-astrologers.
Although LaRouche nowhere refers to the hapless Atlanteans as the "Aryan"  race, he strongly suggests that this is what he means.
They came, he says, from  sunken lands in the North Sea, spoke a language akin to old Hessian, and  roamed the Atlantic in "copper-sheathed" long ships.
Alfred Rosenberg promoted  a similar theory, only his blond and blue-eyed Atlanteans made their forays  against the Untermensch in Wagnerian "dragon ships."
(LaRouche does not  offer, nor did Rosenberg ever offer, the slightest scientific evidence for the  existence of this lost civilization.)
It can be said that LaRouche's version of history not only begins with Nazi and  proto-Nazi ideas (the Atlanteans from the North) but ends with them.
His theory  of the contemporary struggle between parasitic bankers and productive factory  owners is suspiciously similar to the views of Hitler's early economics adviser,  Gottfried Feder.
The latter likewise urged the crushing and expropriation of  speculative capital on behalf of industrial capital.
Oswald Spengler, in a  somewhat different version, hailed the "mighty contest between the two handfuls  of steel-hard men of race and of immense intellect-which the simple citizen  neither observes nor comprehends."
Like LaRouche, SpengJer claimed that the  "battle of mere interests" between capitalists and workers is insignificant in  comparison.
With all the above, it is still a long step to the conclusion that LaRouche's  historical writings are genuine neo-Nazism.
He does discuss the "British" as the  racial enemy of humanity that must be crushed, destroyed, eliminated.
But is he  clearly referring to the Jews when he uses the word "British"?
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Twenty-nine  Elizabeth, Queen of the Jews   When LaRouche says the Queen of England pushes drugs or that Britain is the  chief enemy of the United States, he is not merely indulging in eccentricity or a  Freudian dislike of female authority figures.
These statements have a serious  meaning to anti-Semites and neo-Nazis in West Germany and the United States.
They are eccentric only to those who have not studied the history of modern anti-  Semitism, in which the theme of Jewish-British race mixing and Jewish  domination of the British Empire looms large.
The original Nazis popularized this theory.
In Mein Kampf, Hitler complained that  the Jews in England exert an "almost unlimited dictatorship" through their  manipulation of public opinion.
Heinrich Himmler speculated in his unpublished  notebooks on the "Jewish blood" of the English and Scots.
Alfred Rosenberg's  Myth of the Twentieth Cen^L/ry discussed the alleged identity of the policies of  "Jewish high finance" with those of Great Britain and claimed that the British  government had "handed over control of all financial transactions to Jewish  bankers such as Rothschild, Montague, Cassell, Lazard, etc." Expressing a  theory that the LaRouchians later would repeat in Dope, Inc., Rosenberg said  that England had "allowed the opium trade to fall increasingly into Jewish hands."
Once Nazi Germany and Britain were at war, the Nazis developed a more  exaggerated version.
World-Battle, an official propaganda organ, depicted  "English high finance" as Judaism incarnate.
England's aggression against  innocent Germany, it said, was the result of the Jews buying Churchill with piles  of gold.
Meanwhile Hitler's propaganda chief, Joseph Goebbels, came to regard  the Jews and the British upper classes as virtually one racial entity.
He wrote in  his diary in 1 942: "Rothschild.
.
.
took the floor [of the British House of Commons]  and delivered a tearjerker bemoaning the fate of the Polish Jews....AII members  of Parliament rose from their seats as a silent tribute to Jewry.
That was quite  appropriate for the British House of Commons, which is really a sort of Jewish  exchange.
The English, anyway, are the Jews among the Aryans.
The perfumed  British Foreign Minister, Eden, cuts a good figure among these characters from  the synagogue.
His whole education and his entire bearing can be characterized  as thoroughly Jewish."
The Jewish-British theme was popular among American anti-Semites as early as  the 1890s.
According to historian Richard Hofstadter, "anti-Semitism and  Anglophobia went hand in hand" in populist writings of that decade.
One tract  included a map of the world with an octopus squatting on the British Isles, its  tentacles stretching across the seas.
The octopus was labeled "Rothschilds."
Another tract denounced President Grover Cleveland as a tool of "Jewish  bankers and British gold."
Gordon Clark's Shylock; As Banker, Bondholder,  Corruptionist, Conspirator {^ 894) accused the Rothschilds of bribing the U.S.  government to deliver the American people "into the hands of England, as  England had long been resigned into the hands of her Jews."
The leading anti-  Semite of the period, William Hope ("Coin") Harvey, called for war with Jewish-  dominated England to "blot her name out from among the nations of the earth."
LaRouche's version most closely resembles War!
War!
War!
, a Nazi tract  published in 1940 under the pseudonym Cincinnatus to convince Americans that  Hitler was right and that the United States should stay out of the war.
(The  pseudonym was apparently borrowed from the Society of the Cincinnati, an early  American patriotic league named after Cincinnatus, hero of the ancient Roman  republic.)
Cincinnatus called the British Empire the "British-Jewish Empire."
The  United States, he argued, should not come to the aid of "a mongrel England,  ruled not by Britons of the blood, but, largely, by a galaxy of Jews, half-Jews, and  quarter-Jews."
He added: "The England which.
.
.
beseeches us to come to her  rescue is little more than another segment of the Jewish 'nation.'"
Just like  LaRouche, Cincinnatus said that the real enemy of the United States is a "New  York City, New England, Anglophile, Jewish plot."
There are many other parallels: LaRouche says the British are plotting to starve  "billions" of people to death in the Third World.
Cincinnatus said, "The starvation  of men, women and children has been the most approved English method of  warfare since the Jews became dominant there...." LaRouche says Henry  Kissinger and Ariel Sharon are "British agents."
Cincinnatus quoted the British  anti-Semitic author Hilaire Belloc as saying "the Jew might almost be called a  British agent upon the Continent of Europe and still more in the Near and Far  East."
LaRouche calls the British philosopher Bertrand Russell the most evil man  of the twentieth century.
Cincinnatus devoted several pages to Russell as the  alleged purveyor of "Jewish" immorality.
LaRouche claims that the British-  Rothschild establishment (and the Queen) controls the international drug traffic.
Cincinnatus devoted a chapter to "The Chinese Opium Wars and British-Jews."
LaRouche and his followers write about the alleged hereditary taint of the British  aristocracy, its congenital brain damage, etc.
Cincinnatus quoted Belloc: "[W]ith  the opening of the twentieth century those of the great territorial English families  in which there was no Jewish blood were the exception.
In nearly all of them was  the strain more or less marked; in some of them so strong that though the name  was still an English name.
.
.
the physique and character had become wholly  Jewish and the members of the family were taken for Jews whenever they  traveled...." With all of these similarities, it is not surprising that LaRouche's New  Solidarity includes a column by one "Cincinnatus" (although the alleged author of  the 1940 tract is long dead) and that LaRouche's Security staff once applied for  concealed weapons permits under the name of Cincinnatus Associates.
(Of  course the LaRouchians would claim they merely are identifying with the patriotic  society of George Washington's day.)
The Jewish-British conspiracy theory is popular today with hate groups like the  Ku Klux Klan.
You can purchase dozens of pamphlets on this theme from the  Sons of Liberty in Louisiana.
Mostly written by British fascists in the 1930s, the  titles include The Jews and the British Empire, Our Jewish Aristocracy, and How  Jewry Turned England into a Plutocratic State.
The latter says that the Jews  regard "the British Empire only as a stepping stone towards a coming Jewish  World-Empire" and that "the English government is only the British facade for the  Jew.
...The English statesmen are the well-paid dummies of Jewish-English  finance-capitalism."
The pamphlet also describes the alleged "judaising" of the  English aristocracy through intermarriage.
Because of these "blood-ties," it  concludes, "Jewish finance-capital is identical with British finance-capital."
In 1984 the Sons of Liberty republished War!
War!
l/1/ar.'
with an introduction by  Eustace Mullins, a scholarly anti-Semite who is friendly with the LaRouchians  and attended their 1984 annual convention.
The Sons of Liberty also launders  LaRouche's neo-Cincinnatus doctrines into white supremacist circles via the  pamphlets of the Christian Defense League's Dr. John Coleman.
Scores of  Coleman's pamphlets have titles similar to those of LaRouchian articles or books  and contain identical analyses.
They never mention LaRouche's name, yet the  ideas are his.
Mullins, who is a contributing editor of Coleman's World Economic  Review, says that Coleman "claims to have mysterious connections in British  intelligence, but for the last ten years all he's done is copy LaRouche's stuff."
Thus does the LaRouchian message circulate in the swastika-and-bedsheet  crowd, while LaRouche, the self-styled friend of the White House, is spared  unnecessary public embarrassment.
LaRouche himself has admitted the true meaning of "British" on at least two  occasions.
In The Case of Walter Lippmann, in his discussion of the slave trade  in early-nineteenth-century America, the word "British" is immediately followed by  "Rothschild" in parentheses.
In "Anti-Dirigism Is British Tory Propaganda" (1978)  he expanded the "British" to embrace a network of wealthy Jewish families.
"The  policy-shaping kernel of the enemy forces centered in the British monarchy is a  group of private banking families," he said.
"These are notably the family  interests of the Lazard Brothers, Barings, N. M. Rothschild, Hill Samuel, and  other small private banking houses."
He then added: "Britain-these same  families' interests-has controlled the international opium traffic since early during  the 19th century."
Although LaRouche threw in a single non-Jewish family, the  definition was essentially the same as Alfred Rosenberg's.
The British-Jewish theory was given symbolic expression in New Solidarity in  1978 by a Star of David with Queen Elizabeth at the top flanked by Henry  Kissinger and economist Milton Friedman.
The caption alluded to "satanic  connections."
Thus was made clear the real meaning of LaRouche's accusation  that the Queen pushes drugs.
In "How to Analyze and Uproot International Terrorism," a 1 978 tirade against the  alleged British controllers of European terrorist cells, LaRouche discussed how  the British oligarchy reflects the "national interest" and national "state of mind" of  a network of wealthy families "embedded in various institutions of each nation."
Traditional anti-Semitism regards the Jews in precisely this way: the  cosmopolitan nation living parasitically off other nations.
LaRouche implicated  wide strata of Jews in the conspiracy.
Around the Rothschilds and other leading  families, he wrote, there is gathered a "secondary layer of plebeians.
These.
.
.
include leading intelligence and political families going back a generation  or two, certain families with a legal professional tradition, and so forth....Around  these there is an outer layer of agents, trusted, deemed useful....Around these  strata, another layer of agents, and so down to the pathetically demented  individual environmentalist and terrorist."
LaRouche was not only speaking of Jews; the secondary agent layers included  non-Jews such as the Churchill family.
But in LaRouchian propaganda Zionism is  the chief international tool of the British, and Zionists are usually British agents.
Since most Jews are Zionists, the implication is that most Jews must be British  agents.
In attempting to make this connection, the LaRouchians seized on  General George Brown's infamous 1974 statement about the alleged excessive  influence of Jews in Washington.
In 1977 LaRouche wrote that it was time to  "kick every 6r/Y/s/?
-loving son-of-a-bitch out of Washington."
With a deft touch, the  article took the form of an open letter to Defense Secretary Harold Brown but the  picture was of George Brown.
A New Solidarity editorial then accused the entire  leadership and most of the membership of American Jewish organizations of  being part of the treasonous British conspiracy: "Their loyalties lie not with the  United States but with the Zionist-British organism."
Through the years.
New Solidarity has fleshed out this theory in hundreds of  articles.
The first wave in 1978 included headlines like "British to Sell World  Short," "Brits Run Spy Hoax to Push Cold War Clime," "British Launch Drive to  Break Up the EEC," and "Expel Britain's Kissinger for Treason."
When describing  British machinations.
New Solidarity referred to mostly Jewish names  (Oppenheimer, Montefiore, Meyer, Weill, Warburg, as well as Rothschild).
If the  name weren't obvious, they'd add a tag~e.g., "Lord Crewe, a Rothschild family  cousin."
When non-Jews in the British Establishment were mentioned, there was  often a different kind of tag.
Former Prime Minister Harold Wilson was referred to  as a "Rothschild agent," while Conservative MP Winston Churchill III was said to  live up to his grandfather's "reputation for sycophantic.
.
.
braggadocio in the  service of the Rothschilds."
The LaRouchians listed what they believed to be the key institutions of British  power in the twentieth century~the Fabian Society, the Round Table group, the  Royal Institute for International Affairs, the British Secret Service, etc.
Each was  said to be under "Rothschild" control.
In a pamphlet on the British aristocracy,  LaRouche aide Chris White wrote that the scions of the Rothschild family     "preside over" the British organs of power: The "evolution of the Rothschild family  and its outlook" has determined the "evolution and outlook of the British political  system."
The LaRouchians concocted a pseudo-history of England to bolster this.
The  Norman Conquest in 1066, they said, was instigated by converted Jews around  the papacy as a flanking maneuver against the Teutonic peoples, (That the Jews  were later driven out of England by the Norman kings was irrelevant to this  theory.
The oligarchy doesn't always need to rule directly on the spot.
Indeed, it  may sometimes prefer to rule from afar, using ideology as its control mechanism.
Was not Oxford University in the Middle Ages a nest of bestial nominalists?)
The reestablishment of direct Jewish control of England supposedly began in the  late seventeenth century when William and Mary allowed a few to settle in  London.
A Dutch Jewish banker, Solomon Mendoza, fastened on the Churchill  family as the chief oligarchical agents for the centuries ahead.
Ideological  brainwashing of the English upper classes was accelerated through such  mechanisms as the Anglican Church, the Freemasons, the Knights of Malta,  Humean empiricism, utilitarianism, Fabian socialism, and most recently the  Tavistock Institute.
The vigorous English aristocrats of the Neoplatonic Tudor era  were transformed step by step into effete puppets.
Hence the frequent  LaRouchian quips about homosexuality and genetic deficiency in the British royal  family and top aristocracy: How can the British be real men if they've never stood  up to the Jews?
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Thirty   The War Between the Species     For an ideology of total paranoia to work properly, it must create an unbridgeable  gulf between the forces of good and the forces of evil; they must be regarded as  having nothing in common and as being in total antagonism.
This state of mind is  difficult to achieve.
In the Cold War, for instance, the antagonists have never  gone this far.
Although sharply disagreeing on the questions of democracy and  human rights, neither side totally denies the humanity of the other side.
There is  always the perception of a common interest-in preventing a nuclear war, if  nothing else.
What LaRouche did in the late 1970s was to create an unbridgeable-gulf theory  of extraordinary emotional intensity.
Buttressed by the already existing NCLC  paranoia, it stimulated the most fanatical of his followers to reject totally the  humanity of a specific portion of the human race--the so-called British oligarchy.
This created a state of mind~in theory if not in practice-akin to that of the Nazis.
And as with the Nazis, it hinged on a racial doctrine.
The enemy was defined as  a separate species, totally alien, totally incapable of any common moral or  intellectual ground with LaRouche's own Prometheans, totally hostile to the latter  because of an inbred hatred going back thousands of years.
It was this viewpoint that enabled LaRouche to project his paranoid conspiracy  theory into every aspect of his followers' thinking.
The oligarchy, he taught,  largely controls the world.
This means it determines most of the science,  philosophy, religion, art, and so on that we imbibe.
But since the oligarchy is  totally inhuman and hostile, anything it creates is hopelessly tainted.
There  cannot be any common ground between humanity and the cultural values of the  oligarchical order.
Their artifacts and ideas therefore must be combated  wherever we find them-in the latest rock song, in the oldest medieval parchment,  in our own thought processes.
It is cultural war to the end, with no quarter  possible.
One side is totally right and the other side is totally wrong, and the  wrong side cannot be won over because it is biologically incapable of  understanding what is true and good.
LaRouche first expressed the racist underpinnings of this unbridgeable-gulf  theory in Dialectical Economics (1975), published as a vanity-press textbook by  D. C. Heath & Co.
It portrays the American economy as a battleground between  two breeds of capitalist-the industrial capitalist and the usurer.
To LaRouche  their struggle is not merely economic.
The two classes are "primarily  distinguished by methods appropriate to the differentiation of biological species."
To explain this he adopted the theory of Stalin's agronomy czar, Trofim Lysenko,     that an organism's heredity can change within a single generation as a direct  result of environmental stimuli.
LaRouche gave Lysenko a racialist twist by  suggesting that human intelligence is a result of a "general genetic alteration of  the physiology of mentation after birth."
His evidence was that the "quality of  intelligence" differs from society to society.
So far LaRouche was merely indulging in speculation.
But in "The Secrets Known  Only to the Inner Elites" (1 978), he asserted flatly that changes within a species  can be "induced 'environmentally' without genetic variation."
Thus, he said, the  "hominid stock" can be artificially altered to produce a "new variety" (i.e., a new  race).
If the alteration is great enough, the new race will actually be a "new  species. "
[FN1]   LaRouche argues that the ingrown social and cultural environment of the  "British," bolstered by their inbreeding, has transformed them into precisely such  a genetically separate "species."
He suggests that this is nature's way of  punishing them for engaging in usury and the opium trade, for it hereditarily cuts  them off from the ability to grasp spiritual truths.
"There is a higher reality, which  the British are incapable of comprehending," LaRouche argues.
It "exists  beyond" the bestial "domain of deduction" to which the British mind is limited.
Essentially, LaRouche regards the British as having a relationship to the human  race similar to that of parasite to host.
In his own words: "The ruling British elite  are like animals--not only in their morality, but in their outlook on knowledge.
They are clever animals, who are masters of the wicked nature of their own  species, and recognize ferally the distinctions of the hated human species."
He  has returned to this idea again and again: "I know the British mind very well--it is  a lower order of mentality, which I can study as I watch the fish in an aquarium."
It is the "mind of a species inferior to myself."
The British are "a pack of animals"  and "a different alien species."
They are the "avowed enemies of the entire  human species" who "shamelessly declare war on the human species."
As for  their Zionist philosophy, it emphasizes the "sensual appetites of impulsions of a  racial group, making that racial group self-defined as in moral likeness to a lower  beast."
LaRouche disciple Chris White echoes these sentiments.
The British are a  "specific form of lower life," "not human," "the end product of a specialized  process of genetic engineering" that produced "congenital deficiencies and brain  damage" as early as the 17th century.
In "The Elite That Can't Think Straight" LaRouche portrays the biological struggle  as a relentless personal contest between himself and the top oligarchs.
Their  "inner circles," he says, recognize him as "the ancient and feared adversary of  their own evil species" and as their "potential destroyer."
When they see the  influence of his work, "they tense, growling such phrases as 'potential danger,'  'more dangerous than Hitler,' 'kill it before it succeeds in getting a real foothold in     shaping events.'"
Whether or not LaRouche actually believes himself to be the  new Hitler as implied, he approved the publication of Chris White's pamphlet The  Noble Fam/Vy (1978), which said just about everything left to be said: "Let us  speedily expedite the urgently necessary task of freeing humanity from the grasp  of that specific form of lower life before we are destroyed by them or enslaved by  them.
Let us joyfully ensure that the representatives of the British system are  destroyed so that humanity might live...." And White concluded: "Those of us who  should know better have been tolerant of such creatures for far longer than has  been good for the rest of us.
Let us, with ruthlessness, ensure that the job is  done correctly now."
LaRouche's racialism, like Hitler's, doesn't just target the British.
In a softer form  it applies to most of the human race, which LaRouche accuses of being mired in  sheeplike bestiality and thus requiring close surveillance by LaRouchian  shepherds.
He professes great compassion for the sheep.
Their subhuman state  is the fault of the British.
Once the latter are removed from the scene, the sheep's  heredity can be changed, elevating future generations to the level of true  humanity.
LaRouche describes this process using terms from Plato's Republic, in which  society is composed of an ascending scale of bronze, silver, and golden souls.
But his ideas are very different from Plato's.
To LaRouche the bronze soul is a  sensuous donkeylike wretch (or worse).
To Plato the bronze soul was an upright  moral citizen whose role was to build the wealth of society through craftsmanship  and commerce.
To LaRouche the silver soul is someone who has begun to  accept political leadership from LaRouche or at least has developed an "organic"  humanism parallel to LaRouche's (e.g..
South Africa's white rulers).
To Plato the  silver soul was not defined by his ideology but by his specific function and  talents--he was a member of the warrior class.
To LaRouche the golden souls  are himself and those few lieutenants of his who have fully assimilated his  intellectual method--the so-called "hypothesis of the higher hypothesis."
To Plato  the golden souls were the philosopher-statesmen who took care of government  affairs and studied higher ethical and metaphysical principles to guide them in  their work.
These principles, as expressed by Socrates in Plato's dialogues, have  little in common with LaRouche's ideology.
Plato never theorized about a  hypothesis of the higher hypothesis.
Nor did he regard his philosopher-kings as a  biologically superior race.
The misappropriation of Platonism as a buttress for modern fascism is not unique  to LaRouche.
In 1939, Dr. Otto Dietrich, the head of Hitler's press bureau,  announced that Hitler's views on leadership were "in entire conformity" with  Plato's "immortal Laws" which teach the "voluntary subordination of the masses,  whilst at the same time bringing the 'wise men from within them to leadership.'"
Platonic jargon was also adopted by Oswald Mosley, fuhrer of the British Union  of Fascists, and by members of South Africa's Broederbond during their rise to  power after World War II.
When LaRouche begins to talk about specific etiinic groups, liis liumanist  devotion to raising bronze souls out of their bestial mire suddenly disappears--  apparently because they so stubbornly resist the values of his would-be golden  souls.
He adopts instead a relentless racism fit more for a master race than  idealistic shepherds.
For instance, the Chinese are a "paranoid" people who  share, with "lower forms of animal life," a "fundamental distinction from actually  human personalities."
American blacks who insist on equal rights are obsessed  with distinctions that "would be proper to the classification of varieties of monkeys  and baboons."
Puerto Ricans are intellectually impotent representatives of a  culture based on "'macho' pathology" and crazed blood oaths.
Italians, also  impotent, are obsessed with churches, whorehouses, and "images of the Virgin  Mary" (whose "goddamn smile" LaRouche would like to remove from public view  by closing Italy's churches).
Irish-Americans are representatives of a backward  Catholic "ethnic piggishness" and are responsible for a "hideous mind-and-body-  eroding orgy of fertility."
Tribal peoples, as in Brazil's Amazon Basin, have a  "likeness to a lower beast."
These attitudes have definite implications for LaRouche's doctrine of world  conquest.
In discussing U.S. treatment of American Indians in the nineteenth  century and the conquest of Mexican territories in 1848 by General Winfield  Scott, LaRouche asked: "Was it.
.
.
correct for the American branch of European  humanist culture to absorb the territories occupied by a miserable, relatively  bestial culture of indigenous Americans?
Absolutely.
Was it correct to  absorb.
.
.
the areas taken in the Mexican-American War?
Historically, yes~forthe  same reason."
And the underlying principle?
"We do not regard all cultures and  nations as equally deserving of sovereignty or survival."
How do the Russians fit into the LaRouchian racial theory?
In the late 1970s and  early 1980s, LaRouche tended to see the Soviet Union as being like the United  States~a country influenced by networks of "British" agents but not fully  dominated by them.
For instance, these agents didn't dominate the great "nation  builder" Leonid Brezhnev, But they have been present in Russia for many  centuries as a conspiratorial force and are every bit as evil, in LaRouche's eyes,  as Henry Kissinger or Queen Elizabeth.
They are "morally subhuman,"  "incapable of creative thought," and addicted to "the lowest form of thought,  Baconian swinish groveling, rooting and sniffing of objects."
They reek with the  "hideous stench of subhuman Black Guelph breed."
Ivan the Terrible should  have wiped them out~he tried, but couldn't reach them all.
In 1984, LaRouche reworked his rhetoric against the Soviet Union's "British"  agents into a form that attacked the Russian culture and people as a whole-  apparently to bolster his argument for a crash program to develop SDI.
The  Russians, he said, have been completely dominated for over a thousand years  by an evil culture, descended, like the British, from Babylon.
The Russians  developed by way of Byzantium and the evil Orthodox Church.
Like their British     cousins, they aim at establisliing a liideous form of world domination.
Tliey want  IVIoscow to be tine Tliird Rome, ruling all the earth.
Does the Third Rome theory take the Jews off the hook?
Not at all, for the Jews  and Orthodox Christians are really just two aspects of the same enemy: a single  underlying racial-cultural bacillus.
Here LaRouche apparently borrows an idea  from Oswald Spengler's Decline of the l/1/esMhat there is a Semitic "Magian"  culture common to Jews, Arabs, and Orthodox Christians, a culture of folks who  like to hang out in caves (like Istanbul's Hagia Sophia and New York's Grand  Central Station).
Spengler regarded this culture as backward and superstitious in  comparison with the cathedral-building Promethean/Faustian civilization of  Germany.
LaRouche calls the Magians the "magicians."
When he talks about the  unspeakable evil of the Russian Orthodox Church, he is alluding to the theory  that the Slavic peoples and especially the Russians are culturally an extension  (thanks to the Orthodox Church) of the Magian culture-that of the "Babylonians"  and "Persians" who wrote the Old Testament.
This Magian culture is deeply  engrained in the Russian soul.
And it is a culture that ultimately comes,  LaRouche suggests, from a specific racial type: dark-skinned Dravidians related  to those who fled India at the time of the Aryan invasion and supposedly settled  near Babylon.
If Russia has been under the domination of Magian Orthodoxy for the past  thousand years, then according to LaRouche's cultural mutation theory the  Russians~or at least the Russian oligarchy-must have evolved like the "British"  into a separate species.
The LaRouchians thrill to an almost mystical hatred of  this ultimate enemy.
And they can say about Mount Athos, the center of  Orthodox spirituality: "It is about time someone bombed the Holy Mountain, its  monks, its monasteries, and everything in it.
Bomb it thoroughly, systematically,  and completely so that nothing of its evil legacy survives."
In context, the writer  was referring to the Soviet Union, not Mount Athos.
On close inspection, LaRouche's racialist universe appears to have three species  unknown to zoology: the Western oligarchs (the British-Jewish branch of  Dravidian Babylon); the Eastern oligarchs (the Russian Orthodox branch); and  the bestial masses.
The human species, it would appear, is a fourth species  composed solely of LaRouche and his followers.
Yet LaRouche dreams of a fifth species~the racial superman~the true goal of his  life.
The Platonic hierarchy of bronze, silver, and golden souls thus becomes a  metaphor expressing the biological transmission of Acquired Characteristics.
As  LaRouche wrote in his autobiography.
The Power of Reason: "The objective of  my life is to contribute to bringing men and women out of the wretched condition  of sensuous donkeys and incompletely human 'silver souls' to contribute to  making of our species a race of 'golden souls.'"
If the mutant race is to survive and prosper, liowever, tine two Babylonian species  have got to go.
LaRouche would hasten their departure through the Grand  Design described earlier in this book.
The Grand Design and LaRouche's racialist  theories, put together, include a// the elements of Nazism.
[1] LaRouche follower Carol Cleary, with an undergraduate degree in biology,  tried to develop an underpinning for this.
She argued in a 1 980 Fusion article that  evolution and mutation occur on the chromosomal level rather than the genetic  level, but that the evil Darwinians had suppressed this fact, Cleary's article was  denounced as "hogwash" in a letter from Professor James F, Bonner of the  California Institute of Technology.
Fusion printed Bonner's letter with an abusive  reply from Cleary that essentially said that working hard for LaRouche will  produce chromosomal changes resulting in a higher species.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
PART EIGHT: LaRouche, Inc.: The  Tycoon   One knows perhaps a child who, hand caught in the cookie jar and  mouth full of cookies, will swallow quickly and insist with the  "sincerest" of expressions, "Oh, you shouldn't have startled me.
I  just caught a mouse that had run into the jar; if you hadn't come in  just now, he wouldn't have gotten away. "
—LYNDON H. LAROUCHE, JR.
Chapter Thirty-one  The Root of All Evil   While dreaming in tine early 1960s about becoming America's Trotsky, LaRouche  had another dream — to become a capitalist.
In a report on the shoe industry, he  gave a hint of this ambition.
The business world "has got to get back to  management by tycoons" — that is, by strong leaders who will "manage the  business as a whole" instead of viewing it "as a collection of semi-autonomous  parts."
In the true tycoon's conglomerate, divisions should dovetail into one  centralized system.
LaRouche thus conceived of a business empire much as his  NCLC would become — in which money would be shuttled around from entity to  entity, with no regard for ordinary accounting procedures, to meet the needs of  the moment as determined by LaRouche himself.
In the following years LaRouche frequently railed against speculative capital.
He  contrasted Wall Street's "Levantine gnomes" with the upright patriotic "productive  capitalists," the industrialists who make wheels turn.
One therefore might infer  that when he set out to make the NCLC into a money machine, he would have  steered his followers into some kind of productive activity — machine tools,  aerospace, or even hamburgers.
Instead, he steered them into the least  productive activity imaginable — a grotesque distillation of the speculative capital  he so harshly denounced.
He became a financial pyramid-scheme promoter, only  with a political twist: He built a web of political fund-raising fronts that fraudulently  borrowed as much money as possible — by some estimates close to $200  million — from as many people as possible and then, according to law  enforcement officials, simply refused to pay it back.
None of this loaned money  was invested in anything even indirectly productive such as stocks, bonds, or  money market accounts.
Instead it was mostly pumped into NCLC political     propaganda to build up LaRouche's name recognition and create tine conditions  for yet more borrowing.
Tliese loan scams were an extension of the systematic deceptiveness found in  LaRouche's ideology, propaganda, electoral activity, and intelligence gathering.
Operating as a combination NICPAC and junk-bond entity, his money machine  targeted senior citizens and gullible professionals possessing liquid assets.
Telephone solicitors appealed to their patriotism and conservative beliefs, also  promising 20 percent annual interest.
Some lenders mortgaged or sold their  homes and whatever other assets they possessed.
But when the NCLC fund-  raising entities inevitably defaulted on the loans, the lenders found themselves in  an almost helpless situation, facing an impenetrable network of corporate shells,  dead-end paper trails, and endless legal delaying tactics.
Ironically, the NCLC began in the late 1960s as a quasi-ascetic organization.
The  idea of making money seemed a diversion from the real world of ideas and  revolutionary organizing.
Yet step-by-step LaRouche urged upon his followers  the role of cash in building a movement, and the necessity of raising as much  money as possible by any means necessary.
He steered them first into small  deceptions, more unethical than illegal, then into individual acts of flagrant  deception, and finally into actions that would lead to their indictment for large-  scale white-collar crime.
LaRouche alluded to this transformation of his followers in a 1978 article dealing  ostensibly with political cults other than his own.
Such organizations, he said,  "condition" their members to commit criminal acts, while also being on the  lookout for recruits with preexisting criminal tendencies.
Members are taught to  view the outside world as "not real" and to treat its inhabitants as mere  projections of the cult member's childhood emotions.
Thus, the cult member  becomes in some respects like a "disturbed but functionally effective" small child.
In another article, LaRouche explained that this syndrome includes a  "pathological lie pattern" as in the case of the child caught with his hand in a  cookie jar.
This was not armchair theorizing.
The conditioning of the NCLC membership for  predatory acts had begun as early as 1974, with the leadership practicing rip-off  skills on the rank-and-file members.
The latter were pressured to turn over their  savings and other assets.
Several trust funds were netted from wealthy  members, who overnight became poor members after turning over every penny  in defiance of their parents' wishes.
They were told this was for the socialist  revolution, just as senior citizens would later be told their contributions or loans  were for the Reagan revolution.
Once all immediately available assets of the  members had been looted, the leadership set out to exploit their credit — to get  each member to borrow to the maximum of his or her credit line.
Hundreds of  members borrowed all they could from banks, finance companies, and via their  credit cards or any other available source of credit, and turned the proceeds over     to the organization.
Some took out federal loans for college studies they never  intended to pursue, knowing they would be able to evade repayment for many  years, perhaps forever.
Many borrowed heavily from relatives and friends.
A  favorite tactic was to tell their parents that they needed money for dental work.
According to a former highest-level LaRouche aide, at least 30 percent of NCLC  operating revenues in the mid-1970s came from members' loans.
The leadership  was "like a pack of hyenas," he recalled.
"Members would be induced to get one  loan, then a second, then a third."
The organization would promise to pay them  back, but rarely returned more than token amounts.
Although these practices  netted millions of dollars, the real payoff was psychological: The membership  was compromised ethically, and became inured to further sharp dealings.
This  made it easier to persuade them to bilk elderly widows during the 1 980s.
It also  bound them tightly to the organization, for those who owed thousands of dollars  to credit card companies knew that if they ever quit the NCLC, it would never  help them pay off these debts.
In the short run, most NCLC members didn't have to worry about credit collection  agencies very much, because of their rootless lifestyles as political activists.
They were moved from city to city, often housed in semi-communal apartments  where the phone, mailbox, and lease were in someone else's name.
Even when  a creditor did manage to track them down, they had no assets to be seized, for  they had already given everything to the NCLC.
But the cannibalizing of the members' credit soon reached a point of diminishing  returns.
They became known as deadbeats and were unable to obtain any  further loans.
Their parents and relatives became furious at them, and former  friends avoided them.
(This bound them all the more closely to their NCLC  surrogate family and political friends, and to their surrogate father, LaRouche.)
If LaRouche couldn't get any more loans from them, he could get something even  more valuable — their full-time labor.
Many members were pressured to quit their  jobs or drop out of college to work for the NCLC twelve to sixteen hours a day,  seven days a week.
Members assigned to the national office in New York moved  into low-rent neighborhoods such as Washington Heights, where they survived  on tiny stipends.
Members not regarded as important enough to have stipends  found part-time jobs as typesetters or proofreaders, but spent the majority of their  time working free for the NCLC.
This type of labor exploitation was typical of cults in the 1970s.
Newly recruited  members of the Unification Church sold flowers on the street or worked on the  Rev. Moon's fishing boats, while living in church dormitories and wearing used  clothing provided by the church.
LaRouche's version was the sale of NCLC  literature at airports and other public places.
New recruits were expected to  undergo a testing period of up to two years in which they spent most of their time  in this "field organizing."
They were trained in adversary techniques to bind them     more closely to the NCLC.
When greeted with a less than friendly response from  a passerby, they would insult him, often calling him a tool of Great Britain or  Rockefeller.
Occasionally the targeted person was intrigued or amused, and a  sale would result.
But more often he reacted angrily and walked away.
Sometimes matters escalated.
As a defector told The New York Times: "They get  two inches from a person's face and [verbally] cut them to pieces.
They can get  anybody to hit them in a second."
After a long day of such confrontations and rejection, an NCLC field worker  would internalize more deeply than ever LaRouche's vision of a Promethean elite  besieged in a hostile world.
Their anger would also increase — an important part  of the conditioning.
If one spends one's day insulting perfect strangers, it is not a  large step to begin ripping them off.
LaRouche found it was not cost-efficient to keep a majority of his followers at the  airports.
Unlike the average flower-selling Moonie, many NCLC members had  advanced degrees and highly marketable skills.
LaRouche was able to utilize this  extraordinary labor pool for a variety of ends.
The staff of his intelligence news  service and EIR mostly was composed of individuals with backgrounds in the  humanities and social sciences.
He founded the FEF and his computer software  company, Computron, with those who had training in engineering, science, and  business.
Such members had sacrificed conventional careers and salaries but  were nevertheless intensely ambitious and competed savagely with each other to  rise within the NCLC's internal Chain of Being so as to get as close as possible to  the Godhead (LaRouche).
LaRouche explained the economics of his business empire in a 1981 report: The  NCLC membership's "voluntary and semi-voluntary labor" reduced the labor  costs of the NCLC business fronts way below the equivalent costs in the outside  business world.
"If a person whose skill and activities are competitively worth  $35,000 performs those services for $10,000," he wrote, "the activity has the  implicit value of the same work done at $35,000."
LaRouche cited members  whose competitive worth would be $70,000 a year, "To sacrifice part of such  income levels for a purpose related to a world-historical purpose," he said, "is  morally acceptable, and worthwhile."
For Linda Ray, who joined the NCLC after dropping out of college in 1974, being  "world-historical" meant working as a typesetter sixteen hours a day.
"They'd pay  me $100 a week, but if there was a cash-flow problem I'd get nothing," she  recalled.
One couple that worked full-time on the NCLC editorial staff had a  combined 1982 income of under $5,500.
They lived from hand to mouth, months  in arrears on their semi-slum apartment rent and incessantly threatened by utility  turnoffs while leaving a trail of bounced checks with neighborhood merchants.
Meanwhile, the NCLC's internal discipline became totalistic.
Members were told  what kind of music to listen to.
Spouses informed on one another to the     leadership.
Wives wlio became pregnant were marclied to tine abortionist by tine  "coat-lianger brigade" (politically reliable women from the national office).
Anyone who performed poorly at assigned tasks was denounced in psychological  sessions.
The cement holding this together was the frequent "crisis  mobilizations" during which members were stimulated to work extra hours and  raise giant sums of money to rescue the world from impending nuclear war or  save LaRouche from the latest Zionist hit squad.
The personal satisfactions were  few and far between.
To be allowed an evening off to sing in the NCLC choral  group or listen to a lecture on Dante was the LaRouchian equivalent of a  Caribbean cruise.
In the few moments available for reverie, many members felt desperately  trapped.
But their years of total dependence on the organization for their social  life and livelihood had eroded their self-confidence to the point where they  couldn't imagine living on their own or succeeding in the outside world.
Breaking  away meant losing their closest (and usually their only) friends.
It meant having  to learn all over again how to make decisions for oneself.
Thus, the majority  remained, year after dreary year, developing to a fine pitch the specialized skills  necessary to LaRouche's goals.
Under these conditions the NCLC intelligence staff, editorial department, printing  and typesetting businesses, telephone boiler rooms, and field operations became  a smoothly functioning profit machine.
The national office "sectors" worked  together to produce a wide range of books, magazines, and intelligence reports,  LaRouche field workers sold them at major airports to affluent Americans waiting  for a flight.
Their tables were festooned with signs like "Feed Jane Fonda to the  Whales" — a magnet for conservatives, but a filter device to keep away all liberals  except for those spoiling for an argument.
The books and magazines, such as  Fusion and Executive Intelligence Review, had colorful, well-designed covers.
The field organizers accepted Visa and MasterCard, and hundreds of names  were collected each day.
Telephone solicitors at national headquarters and the  regional offices followed up with calls urging the purchase of an EIR subscription  ($396 a year) or a special EIR report ($250 and up).
Purchasers also were asked  to donate to LaRouche's campaigns or the Fusion Energy Foundation.
In  addition, the telephone fundraisers called people cold from lists purchased from  conservative organizations.
By 1977 airport sales and telephone fundraising were bringing in over $40,000 a  week.
Defectors who left during that period recall having raised $300 a day on  the phone.
By 1 980, according to a former top LaRouche aide, fundraising was  producing $1 90,000 a week (about $1 million for the year).
In mid-1 981  LaRouche announced in a memo that he was upping the quota to "$225,000  weekly in organizing-income of gross sales."
Anything less, he warned, would be  a "disaster."
The airport tables were sponsored by the FEF, conveniently making the  purchases tax-deductible for the customer and tax-free for the LaRouchians.
Actually, the LaRouchians sent all the money to NCLC headquarters, not the  FEF, and the NCLC finance officers stashed it in the accounts of any front group  they pleased.
Some businessmen bought EIR or Fusion subscriptions to humor  the solicitor or as a gesture of support for nuclear power, writing off the purchase  as a corporate expense.
These purchasers included officers of major  corporations such as ITT and TRW.
By 1 984 EIR claimed 1 1 ,500 paid  subscribers — if true, this would have yielded $4.5 million.
EIR also offered  customized reports and "retainer-contract" intelligence services.
The publications were produced with state-of-the-art printing and typesetting  equipment at the NCLC-controlled PMR Printing Company and World  Composition Services in New York City and at Renaissance Printing Company in  Detroit.
Thanks to their low-cost labor, these firms were able to bid successfully  for outside clients.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, World Comp's clients  included the United Nations and the Ford Foundation, while PMR handled jobs  for Harper & Row, New York University, and the YWCA.
Many clients were  unaware of the LaRouche connection.
Renaissance Printing worked for the  Teamsters union, which was aware of the link, and soon expanded into financial  printing, obtaining several Wall Street investment houses as clients.
This gave it  access to the type of confidential data that is sometimes used in insider trading,  although there is no evidence that such information was misused.
Some LaRouchians began to dream of long-term business collaborations on a  high level.
Ian Levit of the NCLC Security staff went to Houston in 1980 to meet  with oilmen who had been contacted through EIR and Fusion, and who  supposedly had access to a "tremendous amount of venture capital."
After  drawing up profiles of some of the most promising contacts, Levit concluded that  the trip was "proof that we can successfully mix our political and business  activities directly" and thus "strengthen both dramatically."
EIR and the FEF, he  said, "can and must become the center of trade deals."
The same attitude was  seen in a 1979 letter from Chicago NCLC leader Mitchell Hirsch to Robert Malott,  chairman of the FMC Corporation, It was carefully worded to suggest that the  LaRouche organization was an integral part of the business community: "We  [businessmen] face competition for key markets worldwide....Unless the decline  of the dollar.
.
.
is quickly reversed, we shall face a most dangerous international  situation."
The writer enclosed a copy of EIR and invited Malott to meet with  LaRouche.
The most successful LaRouchian commercial business, Computron  Technologies Corporation, grew out of a collaborative relationship with Wang  Laboratories.
Computron was a software house founded by NCLC members in  1973.
At its inception it received equipment, encouragement, and software  development contracts from Wang, and later became a Wang turnkey vendor.
Wang steered many of its own hardware customers to Computron for specialized  software.
Tine cliief founders of Computron were NCLC cliief of staff Gus Kalimtgis and liis  close friend Andy Typaldos.
Kalimtgis was the silent partner, although his wife  was the office manager and signed the checks.
In the computer world Computron  seemed to be just another business, and Typaldos just another hustling  salesman.
But Typaldos was a member of the NCLC national committee, where  he used the pseudonym "Andreas Reniotis."
His wife, Rene, was one of the  LaRouchians arrested for allegedly kidnapping Alice Weitzman in 1974.
His  sister-in-law, Janice Hart, later became briefly famous as the LaRouchian  candidate who won the Illinois secretary of state primary in 1986.
Computron established an excellent reputation.
Many of its bright LaRouchian  programmers received top-flight training from Wang but continued to work for  Computron at salaries well below industry standards, Computron thus became  one of the largest software houses in the New York area.
By 1979, its revenues  topped $5 million a year, and its clients included AT&T, Citibank, Mobil Oil,  Colgate-Palmolive, Bristol-Myers, Weight Watchers International, and Benton & Bowles Advertising.
Its NCLC connection was a carefully guarded secret from  most clients and non-LaRouchian employees.
Use of its computer facilities for  political purposes took place at night, after the regular employees had left.
The secret was exposed in the Manhattan weekly Our Town in September 1979.
When Computron denied it.
Our Town published a second article showing that  most top Computron executives were NCLC members and had made  contributions to LaRouche's presidential campaign, and that LaRouche had lived  in a company apartment and used a company car.
Computron's LaRouche  connection also was noted in a New York Times article.
Wang, although well  aware of these facts, continued its profitable association with Computron.
According to former Computron employees, the software firm covered upwards  of 20 percent of the NCLC's operating expenses in the late 1970s, when at least  $750,000 was skimmed from company revenues at a rate of $5,000 to $10,000  per week.
This skimming sharply increased to pay for LaRouche's 1980  presidential campaign.
In addition, Computron extended heavy credit to  LaRouche's campaign committee for computer services.
This was done although  LaRouche had not yet paid back Computron's loans-in-kind to his 1976  campaign.
(The treasurer of the 1980 campaign, Felice Merritt Gelman, was  married to a top Computron programmer.)
Late in 1980, Typaldos and Kalimtgis protested that LaRouche was destroying  the company with his incessant demands for cash.
LaRouche called them KGB  agents, forced them out of the organization, and ordered all loyal NCLC  members at Computron to quit their jobs.
Several executives and employees  rebelled and sided with Typaldos and Kalimtgis, but most followed LaRouche's     orders.
LaRouche also circulated memos accusing the Computron chiefs of using  NCLC funds to subsidize their firm.
Kalimtgis argued that the opposite was the  case, and that Computron's management had "repeatedly tried to sell off future  business assets and business ventures" to meet the NCLC's needs.
Kalimtgis  warned LaRouche of possible "legal jeopardy" if he didn't shut up.
"Unlike you,  Lyn, I do not say to myself that 'even if I were put before ten grand juries I would  tell them that I knew nothing....'"   In March 1 981 , Computron filed for reorganization under the Chapter 1 1  provision of the Bankruptcy Act, listing obligations of $3 million, including almost  $400,000 owed to Wang, When the creditors' committee took the depositions of  company officers, it learned that financial records for the period of LaRouche's  campaign had disappeared.
Subsequently the bankruptcy judge, upon receiving  copies of the NCLC internal correspondence in which Kalimtgis and LaRouche  accused each other of fraud, ordered the creditors' committee's attorneys to  launch an investigation of LaRouche's alleged looting of the company.
Several  subpoenas were issued and depositions taken, but the investigation was  terminated rather abruptly.
An affidavit in the court record, signed by the  accountant for the creditors' committee, states that Wang's Allen Vogel, chairman  of the committee, "informed counsel that the investigation should be discontinued  and that the committee wanted to get on with the plan [for reorganization]."
Earlier Vogel had written that he strongly resented Computron trying to cover up  problems with a "legal or political smoke screen."
But now, Wang apparently  feared the possible negative publicity from any airing of Computron's past, which  would inevitably have called public attention to Wang's own dealings with the  LaRouchian firm.
LaRouche had learned from the Computron split that his Neoplatonic humanism  didn't mix too well with traditional capitalism.
The problem, he decided, was that  treacherous NCLC members had put business before politics, and private  fiefdoms before the interests of the NCLC as a whole.
He cracked down fast on  PMR and World Comp executives who had displayed similar signs of "liberalism,"  but he was too late with Renaissance Printing in Detroit.
In the fall of 1981 the  entire staff and management quit the NCLC in one giant walkout.
LaRouche had to face the real problem — not treachery, but burnout.
As he  explained it to his loyalists: "Frightened people past thirty realize, 'I'm not a kid  any longer.'
Sexual anxieties become more insistent.
The lure of 'inner  psychological needs' and lusts of 'earthly paradise' become stronger in every  person of middle years who has lost his or her moorings in the larger reality.
Frightened people become 'little people,' and 'little people' are like rats, like the  Jew in the concentration camps...."   Much of the burnout and associated discontent at Renaissance and Computron  resulted from the 1980 campaign — the largest effort in the NCLC's history.
In the  desperate scramble to meet campaign needs, LaRouche and his closest aides     turned to questionable financial practices on a bolder scale than ever before.
They began to discuss the targeting of senior citizens for large loans, a practice  that would flower during the subsequent 1984 campaign.
They also played fast and loose with federal matching funds in 1980, building on  a scheme worked out during LaRouche's 1976 campaign.
The law requires that a  matching-funds applicant raise a minimum of $5,000 in each of twenty different  states in contributions of no more than $250 each.
The NCLC tactic in 1976 was  to get a member to make a donation in, say, Oregon, often with money provided  from one of the NCLC's many corporate shells.
The donation would then be  recycled by "expensing" it to one of the NCLC's in-house vendors, who would re-  donate it in Connecticut in the name of another NCLC member.
The donor  sometimes was not even an actual resident of the state, but an itinerant volunteer  sent in for a few weeks.
In the face of such abuses and bogus donations, the  Federal Election Commission turned down LaRouche's 1976 application after  conducting a thorough field audit.
LaRouche's response was to sue the FEC in  federal court, charging a conspiracy to violate his civil rights.
In 1980 LaRouche managed to obtain over $500,000 in matching funds.
This  was partly because he had moved to the right and thus could attract a greater  number of legitimate donations than was possible in 1976.
It was also because of  false reporting of literature sales and FEF donations.
According to Anne-Marie  Vidal, who worked in the national office during the 1980 campaign: "A contributor  would give money to the FEF to promote nuclear power.
Unbeknownst to the  contributor, the money would be listed as a contribution to LaRouche."
The  Federal Election Commission audited LaRouche's campaign finances and ruled  that he must pay back $1 12,000.
LaRouche claimed political persecution by the  commission, and again filed suit in federal court.
He eventually paid a reduced  assessment of $56,000, plus a $15,000 penalty, and the FEC refrained from  recommending criminal prosecution.
In 1984 and 1988, the FEC again awarded  LaRouche matching funds, making a total of over $1 .7 million for all three  elections.
What LaRouche had discovered was a virtually prosecution-proof scam.
The  FEC often sues for the return of money, but it almost never refers cases to the  Justice Department for criminal prosecution because of the potentially chilling  effect on the electoral process.
Also during the 1980 campaign the LaRouchians carried out several swindles  targeting private citizens.
The biggest was the alleged looting of Computron,  which filed for Chapter 1 1 and thus forced Wang and other creditors to indirectly  help pay for LaRouche's campaign.
The LaRouchians also presumably benefited  from an imaginative scheme involving an alleged Italian Renaissance painting.
A  LaRouche financial adviser, Stephen Pepper, who ran an art dealership on the  side, persuaded several investors to put up $50,000 to purchase what Pepper  claimed was a major work of art.
Carlo Maratta's Marriage of the Virgin.
Pepper     promptly turned the money over to the campaign, leaving the investors to  discover that their newly acquired asset was a fake having negligible value.
They  spent years in litigation chasing their money.
Pepper and several others, including LaRouche himself, cultivated a Wall Street  economist.
Dr. Michael Hudson, author of several works in economic history.
They told him that their New Benjamin Franklin Publishing House would like to  republish several important nineteenth-century economists that he had cited in  his scholarship.
They also asked him for money, offering 20 percent on a three-  month loan secured by the publishing house and two top LaRouche aides.
Hudson had his lawyer draw up the notes and with some trepidation turned over  $75,000.
But the only books that were published were by or about LaRouche.
The latter met with Hudson two months later and asked him to convert his loan  into stock in the publishing company, promising him an administrative post.
When Hudson turned the offer down, his NCLC contacts dropped all pretenses of  friendliness.
They explained that LaRouche had told them he was politically  unreliable.
Franklin House defaulted on the notes, then sought to stretch out the  payment period.
Its checks bounced, and when Hudson demanded return of his  principal, he was told that the money was needed to pay for LaRouche's  bodyguards.
If he persisted in asking for his money back, they would have to  conclude he was part of the world plot to kill LaRouche.
Hudson filed a federal  racketeering suit and was promptly attacked by the LaRouchians in an article  calling him a KGB agent.
It took him four years in court to obtain a judgment  against them, only to find there was no practical way to collect.
Franklin House  had been stripped to a bare shell.
When Hudson's legal efforts were discussed inside the NCLC, LaRouche  Security aide Michelle Steinberg said (according to FBI testimony at her 1986  bail hearing): "Piss on him.
Fuck him.
That's what he gets for lending us money."
The victimizing of Hudson was the first well-documented case of fraud in what  prosecutors allege was the defrauding of thousands of other lenders.
And  Hudson, for his part, cured of any illusions about the LaRouchians, became a  prosecution witness in criminal proceedings against them.
In addition to overt loan fraud, NCLC corporate shells ran up huge bills with  vendors.
When the latter came to collect, they were usually offered stretched-out  payments.
But even these checks bounced.
Plaintiffs found that the fronts had  few fixed assets.
For instance, they typically leased rather than purchased  typesetting equipment and other machinery.
New York County judgment dockets  show that in the late 1970s and early 1980s LaRouchian business and political  entities were hit with over a million dollars in judgments and tax liens, most of  which have still not been satisfied.
NCLC bookkeeper Richard Welch described the practice of stiffing vendors as  the " 'jettison' principle."
He recommended it as a way to handle financial  shortfalls.
The trick was first to build up credit and then jettison the vendor for a     new one.
Welch suggested this be done with copying machine rental companies,  telephone companies, landlords, and suppliers of office equipment, as well as  with members' credit cards.
Defectors recall a variation on the jettison principle practiced at NCLC  headquarters in New York in the early 1980s.
Dozens of members began using a  check-cashing business near the West Fifty-eighth Street office.
Things went  smoothly for a while, but suddenly one week all the checks (which were drawn on  a NCLC payroll shell with no assets) bounced, leaving the check-cashing  company holding the proverbial empty bag.
Shortly thereafter, LaRouche's  headquarters moved to Leesburg, Virginia.
Of course, not all vendors can be jettisoned or skipped out on.
Sooner or later an  organization heavily dependent on telephone fundraising has to pay the phone  company.
But there are still ways to delay payment and thus in effect get an  interest-free "loan."
When New York Telephone threatened to turn off the NCLC  phones during the 1976 presidential campaign because of nonpayment, the  NCLC filed suit, charging political harassment.
It claimed the phone company  was in cahoots with the FBI and the Rockefellers.
Not many people who receive a turnoff notice think of depicting it as a political  plot.
But LaRouche seemed to be learning from Third World countries, which use  political rhetoric and demonstrations as a tactic to delay paying the interest on  their bloated loans from "imperialist" banks.
The NCLC suit against New York  Telephone probably cost the company more in legal fees than the LaRouchians  owed.
Again, the principle is well known in the Third World: If American bankers  know that IMF austerity will cause guerrilla warfare in country X and result in the  United States having to underwrite an expensive counterinsurgency campaign,  then they will ease off temporarily while trying to persuade Washington to help  country X with its debt payments.
The LaRouchians supplemented their vendor stiffing with check kiting, a tactic  that essentially works like this: You write a check to someone in New York drawn  on an out-of-state account that has insufficient funds to cover it.
Depending on  whether or not the recipient of the check deposits it immediately, you have a  shorter or longer period before sufficient funds must be present in the account to  avoid the check's bouncing.
This period corresponds to what the banks term  "float."
It can be extended several days by letting the check bounce, then asking  your creditor to wait before re-depositing while you check your records and/or  straighten out a temporary unforeseen cash-flow problem.
Average citizens take advantage of check kiting whenever they write a check  prior to depositing the money to cover it.
But it does not become really profitable  unless a business kites large numbers of checks on out-of-state banks.
Companies that have specialized in this — say, by keeping an amount equal to  their average kited amount in money market accounts they could not otherwise     maintain — liave made millions of dollars in profits before being prosecuted and  having to pay heavy fines and make restitution.
An attorney who once worked for the LaRouchians says he brought up the  question of float and check kiting with the NCLC finance sector in 1974 after  having read a banking report on it.
This was at a time when, to all appearances,  the NCLC was still relatively unsophisticated about money.
To his amazement,  they not only knew all about float but also described to him how they were kiting  checks all over the United States using dozens of accounts.
That this was  continued and expanded is suggested by records of a 1984 suit by LaRouche's  Campaigner Publications against Chemical Bank.
In answering pretrial  interrogatories.
Campaigner furnished lists of hundreds of its checks that  bounced over a three-month period that year.
Most of the checks were written to  individuals and companies in Virginia on a Chemical account in Manhattan.
Of  course, the LaRouchians blamed their problem on the bank's alleged negligence.
Today's NCLC has grown into a vast cash-in/cash-out business with tens of  millions of dollars a year in revenue, most of which is kept in constant circulation.
With hundreds of accounts all over the world, disguised under dozens of  corporate names or held in the names of individual NCLC members, it has the  ability to write checks against insufficient funds.
This has the effect of a  constantly self-renewed interest-free loan of huge proportions.
The LaRouchians  are getting interest-free use of the money of everyone around them — money  which, with good luck and clever legal maneuvering, they may never have to  repay.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Thirty-two  The Shell Game   How did LaRouche get away with so flagrantly defying his creditors and violating  federal campaign financing laws?
How did he and his followers evade scrutiny by  the IRS?
To answer these questions, one must understand the financial structure  that LaRouche has built to protect himself: an interlocking network of over thirty  entities, seemingly independent of one another but actually controlled centrally  through informal mechanisms.
This business-political "empire" is an elaborate  shell game.
Cash is always in motion from one shell to another, disguising  questionable transactions and avoiding court judgments.
The entities include  corporations, partnerships, individual NCLC members operating under business  names, political action committees (PACs), electoral campaign committees, and  the tax-exempt (until 1987) Fusion Energy Foundation.
At any given moment the  money in the bank accounts of these various entities has little to do with their  actual operating receipts and expenditures.
Funds are shifted around to meet the  needs of the LaRouche organization as a whole.
Considerable amounts  sometimes will be in the personal bank accounts of trusted but appropriately  obscure NCLC members.
Large reserves are reportedly held in offshore banks  where U.S. claimants and authorities cannot gain access.
In the mid-1980s, there  were well over one hundred bank accounts involved in these transactions in the  United States alone, while LaRouche's European Labor Party had its own  interlocking shells and cash was moved between the United States and Europe  by courier.
At the center of this financial web sits an unincorporated political association, the  National Caucus of Labor Committees (NCLC), of which LaRouche is the  chairman.
The NCLC has no assets, and keeps no bank accounts; in effect, it is  judgment-proof.
LaRouche controls it through a kind of politburo, the National  Executive Committee, which meets almost every day.
The most important  financial decisions are made at these meetings, and LaRouche's approval is  always required.
Even when he is out of the country, he keeps in close daily  communication.
To insulate LaRouche and prevent the entities from being liable for each other's  debts, the NCLC denies any controlling role.
Its leaders today describe it as  merely a "philosophical association" which meets occasionally to discuss Plato's  Timaeus and similar refined topics.
But in 1974, LaRouche described it as a  "vanguard political organization."
And in 1976, the NCLC director of organization,  Warren Hamerman, declared in a financial report that the "budget and  deployment of funds" proceed from a unified strategy.
His report used charts and  figures to illustrate the flow of money to and from the various entities, including     the nonprofit FEF.
The NCLC's total resources, he said, are "centrally deployed  internationally to achieve maximum concentrated political firepower."
From the beginning, all entities were headed by a tiny coterie of trusted  LaRouche aides.
The incorporators, officers, or directors usually included Nancy  or Ed Spannaus and Kenneth or Molly Kronberg.
Most entities shared the same  offices, telephone switchboard, lawyers, computer services, bookkeepers, in-  house payroll company, and printing and typesetting facilities.
This made it  extremely difficult for creditors of any entities to foreclose, unless their judgment  was against several shells at once.
The personnel of the entities were as interchangeable as the equipment.
Fundraisers would claim to be from the FEF one day and from Campaigner  Publications or Caucus Distributors the next.
The money that poured in rarely  stayed in the account of the entity to which the check was made out.
Indeed,  weekly financial reports going back to the mid-1 970s show the cash from all  LaRouche's entities going into one kitty.
Using CIA jargon, LaRouche referred to  the NCLC's "proprietary" relationship to the entities.
In a 1979 speech he called  them the "predicates, the shadows, the footprints" of the NCLC.
In a 1981  pamphlet he said the NCLC "participates as a 'mother' or significantly as a  'partner' component."
The incorporation papers of Caucus Distributors, Inc. — the  most successful of LaRouche's telephone fund-raising entities — affirm outright  that its purpose is to promote the "political ideas and beliefs" of the National  Caucus of Labor Committees.
Some of the entities are just fancy names for the NCLC's own internal sectors.
For instance.
New Solidarity International Press Service, Inc., is the NCLC  intelligence sector in its guise as a commercial producer of intelligence in  published form or as confidential reports for private clients.
Businesses run by NCLC members are expected to put the NCLC's needs first.
Former LaRouchian Eric Lerner found this out when he and several comrades  formed a company to promote a water desalinization invention.
After leaving the  NCLC, he stated in a 1979 lawsuit that NCLC leaders had pressured him to  funnel the firm's profits to the U.S. Labor Party, the electoral arm of the NCLC, in  violation of election laws.
Lerner charged that this was standard policy with other  NCLC-controlled businesses.
The practice extended to the nonprofit FEF with its multimillion-dollar annual  revenues.
Bank records show that in the early 1980s the FEF transferred large  amounts to several profit-making LaRouche entities.
Many large checks were  simply made out to "cash."
The NCLC's policy of keeping no assets in its own name dates back to 1978,  when a $90,000 judgment against the NCLC was obtained by the Bank of Nova  Scotia, The NCLC simply shut down its accounts and transferred its assets to     controlled entities.
An NCLC internal memo boasted that these assets had gone  "underground."
LaRouche handles his personal finances in the same way.
He holds no property  in his own name, maintains no personal bank accounts within the United States,  and receives no salary, ostensibly living off the charity of his followers.
His  residences are always owned or rented by associates, so that he appears to be a  guest in his own house.
In 1984 he testified in a lawsuit that he hadn't paid a  penny in income tax for twelve years, and had no idea who paid for his food,  clothing, attorneys, and other necessities.
"I have not made a purchase of  anything greater than a five-dollar haircut in the last ten years," he said.
LaRouche's attorney, Odin Anderson, claimed that in living this way LaRouche  was following the example of Mahatma Gandhi.
In the early 1970s, when "Lyn  Marcus" the Marxist ideologue lived in a small, rundown apartment, the  comparison would not have been so absurd.
But LaRouche's standard of comfort  changed dramatically after he married Helga Zepp.
The Sutton Place town  house, a villa in Germany, hired bodyguards, armored limousines, and frequent  world travel all became necessities.
Anne-Marie Vidal recalled the resentment  that Helga's shopping sprees stirred up among NCLC women: "She'd put down  more for a blouse than most members would spend on clothes in a year."
After Ronald Reagan became President, LaRouche and his top lieutenants  discussed moving the organization to the Washington area.
The first stage came  in 1983, when LaRouche, Helga, and several top aides moved to the vicinity of  Leesburg, Virginia, an affluent community thirty minutes from Washington in  Loudoun County (fox-hunting country).
They rented an estate with a three-story  house and a barn for Helga's horse.
Moving hundreds of NCLC members and the national office to Virginia required  massive sums.
Homes and office space had to be found.
Real estate had to be  purchased as well as rented.
All this coincided with LaRouche's 1984 presidential  campaign, which included lavish plans for television advertising.
To cope with the heavier demands, the NCLC fundraising system was  reorganized in the spring of 1984.
Until that time, fund raising had been left  largely to the regional NCLC organizations.
It was henceforth centralized at the  national headquarters' telephone banks.
Scores of NCLC intelligence and  editorial staffers were reassigned to full-time fundraising.
Anyone who balked  was accused of elitism.
A California NCLC leader, William Wertz, was brought in  to oversee the revamped system.
According to federal court testimony, Wertz's philosophy was simple: There was  no such thing as a loan, and money borrowed should not be repaid.
An exception  might occasionally be made for lenders who were politically important or  threatened to launch a major legal battle.
But that was for the NCLC leadership     to decide.
The rank-and-file fundraisers were expected to get on tlieir assigned  pliones, work tlirougli tlieir stacks of contact cards, and milk the lenders at top  speed.
Soon the phones were being worked fourteen to sixteen hours a day by as many  as 120 people in the national office and upwards of 300 people in the regional  offices.
Telephone fundraising became "the one and only activity for which  people lived and breathed," according to federal witness Charles Tate, himself a  former fundraiser.
New York regional NCLC leader Phil Rubinstein supervised a  telephone operation that floated like a crap game from apartment to apartment in  upper Manhattan, the Bronx, and New Jersey, leaving a trail of victims, (While  involved in this, Rubinstein ran for mayor of New York in the 1985 Democratic  primary, promising to weed out corruption,)   The national office boiler room developed a boot-camp atmosphere.
"There'd be  a roll call in the morning," Tate said.
"Wertz would call out each name.
You were  given these gargantuan quotas, and you were expected to work from 9 A.M. until  you met the quota, even if that was eleven or twelve at night," Members who  didn't meet their quotas were yelled at, denied any days off, or accused of  homosexuality or drunkenness.
When one party leader's wife failed to meet her  quota, her husband beat her up.
It worked — she became the most ruthless of  fundraisers.
Wertz interrupted work twice a day for pep talks.
"He would describe us as being  like Patton's army," Tate testified.
"If we didn't make the landing like at  Normandy.
.
.
all of civilization would come tumbling down."
(Wertz also concocted  little motivational poems, such as: "Here's to St. Martin, the Roman, who offered  his cloak to a beggar...." In a harsher frame of mind he wrote: "Armageddon is  coming.
.
.
if thou fail'st to act as the right arm of the Lord."
And: "Killer instinct is  needed in him who would wage righteous warfare.
.
.
kill with the weapons of art.")
According to federal investigators, the LaRouche organization's income soared to  more than $30 million in 1984.
During a four-month period a single Manhattan  bank account of Campaigner Publications handled credits of more than $4.5  million.
This was only one of many Campaigner accounts, and Campaigner was  only one of many fund-raising entities.
Although a substantial portion of the  revenues came from legitimate literature sales or donations, investigators say  that a larger amount was the result of two intertwined scams: unauthorized  charges to credit cards (there were thousands of such charges) and the  solicitation of loans which the NCLC had no intention of repaying.
Whenever airport travelers purchased literature or made a donation to the FEF or  LaRouche's presidential campaign via credit card, they allegedly were at risk of  additional, unauthorized charges.
There was an art behind this, according to  records in a suit filed by a bank against the LaRouchians.
A fundraiser in the  LaRouche boiler room would phone the National Data Corporation to verify how     much could be charged.
When told the requested charges exceeded the  cardholder's credit limit, the fundraiser would call back requesting a lower charge,  and repeat this process until the cardholder's credit limit was determined.
The  fundraiser would then decide how much to rip off, perhaps a small amount that  might go unnoticed by the cardholder, or sometimes an amount that would clean  out the account.
When the victim discovered the loss on his monthly statement, one of two things  would happen.
Sometimes the LaRouchians would apologize profusely, blaming  it on a clerical error, and eventually return the money, having enjoyed an interest-  free short-term loan.
But more often, having withdrawn the cash through one of  many LaRouchian credit-card merchant accounts, they stonewalled both the  bank and the credit-card holder.
Ultimately the bank would gel fed up and freeze  the merchant account, but the money in it would total only a fraction of the  unauthorized charges.
The bank would be out the difference.
Two banks hit hard were Chemical Bank and New Jersey's First Fidelity.
After  they froze the LaRouchian accounts they were sued for allegedly being part of a  political conspiracy against LaRouche.
First Fidelity eventually spent more on  legal expenses than it would have lost by writing off the debt.
In New Jersey,  LaRouche's harassment machine went into high gear, with press conferences  and hundreds of thousands of leaflets calling First Fidelity a Mafia money  laundry.
The bank responded with a federal court racketeering suit against  LaRouche, twenty-one associates, and twenty organizations.
(The suit,  eventually settled out of court, produced detailed information about LaRouche's  financial empire.)
Vendors who suffered included Sans Souci Travel in New York City.
The  LaRouchians paid for airline tickets via unauthorized charges to the American  Express cards of people who had previously made donations or purchases.
When these people protested, American Express invalidated the charges, for a  loss to the travel agent amounting to $106,000.
Thousands of 1984 loans were solicited through LaRouche's two presidential  campaign committees, which spent a total of $6.3 million.
The FEC filings of  Independent Democrats for LaRouche (IDL) listed almost 2,600 loans totaling  over $1 .2 million.
By October 1 985 almost all these loans were past due, and  only $139,000 had been paid back.
An FEC official described this as "highly  unusual — I don't recall anything quite like it in any other filing."
As of mid-1987  LaRouche's campaign debts totaled $2.6 million, more than any of the major  1984 candidates except John Glenn.
Additional loans were solicited in the name of Caucus Distributors, Campaigner  Publications, and the FEF.
Fund-raising quotas were set at $400,000 a week in  1984, and then were upped to $500,000 and $600,000 in 1985 and 1986.
Fundraisers increasingly targeted the most vulnerable people they could find —     elderly widows living alone, stroke victims, and terminal cancer patients.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Thirty-three   The World's Most Expensive Glass of Sherry   Millions of senior citizens live alone.
Often desperate for companionship, they are  prone to manipulation by younger people who pretend to show interest in them.
They also are easily intimidated or frightened.
Some are in the early stages of  senility, no longer able to make wise decisions about money, yet unprotected by  a financial guardian.
Others have clouded judgment because of illness or the  recent death of a spouse.
They may have substantial assets in the form of their  life savings in stocks or bonds.
They also may own their homes or other property,  which can be borrowed against or even sold outright.
They are thus ripe for the  pickings, as LaRouche's followers perceived.
Anne Cresson, seventy-seven, of Princeton, New Jersey, was living alone when  contacted in 1985.
Her husband was in a nursing home with Alzheimer's, and her  son lived in California.
She was not wealthy, but from time to time she had  donated to the Republican Party and various conservative causes.
This put her  on the New Right's fundraising lists.
The LaRouchians obtained her name from  one of these lists and called her.
They said they were patriots fighting for Ronald  Reagan's policies.
They asked her if she would like to personally help the  President of the United States.
They didn't ask her to donate money.
Instead,  they asked her if she had any property that could be used as collateral for loans.
Mrs. Cresson told them she owned a coin collection appraised at $75,000.
A  LaRouche fundraiser offered to pay her 12 percent interest for the use of it as  loan collateral — seemingly a generous offer given the low loan-to-value ratio on  coin collections.
Mrs. Cresson consented, and a man from the LaRouche  organization came to her house and picked up the coins.
He gave her an  unsecured promissory note — a printed form on the letterhead of Caucus  Distributors.
The address on the letterhead was the former NCLC headquarters  on West Fifty-eighth Street in Manhattan, which by this time was an empty  building slated for demolition.
(The LaRouche organization had moved out  several months earlier.)
Mrs. Cresson had second thoughts the next day.
She called LaRouche  fundraiser Joyce Rubinstein and asked that the coin collection be returned.
Mrs.  Rubinstein refused, saying the coins had been sent to Chicago for appraisal, but  offered to visit Mrs. Cresson to discuss the matter further.
Mrs. Cresson  happened to speak to her son on the phone that day and told him the story.
He  called the Princeton police.
They arrested Mrs. Rubinstein at Mrs. Cresson's  home.
She was charged with theft by deception and held at the police station.
It  was one of the rare occasions when someone took a tough line with the     LaRouchians.
Several hours later, Mrs. Rubinstein's comrades meekly returned  the coin collection to Mrs. Cresson.
Not all schemes had such happy endings for the intended targets.
Margaret  Beynen, eighty-three, of Berkeley, California, suffered more than a year of  trauma to get back a portion of her money.
LaRouche fundraisers began calling  her in late 1 985.
They told her America's banking system was about to collapse.
Her money would be safer if she lent it to them, and they would pay 1 percent  interest.
The loan would be used to fight drugs, which otherwise would destroy  America.
Then began the subtle intimidation: "Through long and frequent  telephone calls," Mrs. Beynen later told the court, the LaRouchians "probed  deeply" into her personal and financial affairs, pressuring her for money.
Over a  two-month period she made four loans to them totaling $60,000 — a substantial  portion of her life savings.
They sent Federal Express couriers to pick up the  checks.
Next, the LaRouchians began urging her to convert the loans into gifts.
When  she refused, they called her a selfish old woman.
Interest payments on the loans,  which had been intermittent, ceased altogether.
In May 1986 she received a form  letter from Caucus Distributors, Inc. (CDI), asking all its lenders to extend or  forgive their loans.
"If you have not been repaid according to schedule," the letter  said, "you may be angry.
You have a right to be angry."
However, the letter  suggested the anger should be directed at the Justice Department, the Eastern  Establishment, and the drug lobbyists, who had launched "financial warfare"  against LaRouche and CDI.
The letter also warned about certain liars who were  going around saying that "LaRouche preys on old people," and urged any lender  contacted by such a person to alert CDI immediately.
Mrs. Beynen wrote to CDI requesting the interest due on her loan.
Weeks passed  before she received a brief reply: "We are winning the war — stay with us."
But  still no money came.
In August she sent another letter.
This time there was no  reply at all.
Mrs. Beynen realized that she might never see her money again and  that she had jeopardized the financial security of her only heir, her blind and  diabetic son.
A San Francisco attorney, Dan Bookin, was willing to take Mrs. Beynen's case  pro bono, and filed a racketeering suit on her behalf in federal court.
Mrs. Beynen  eventually obtained a court order to seize the assets of two LaRouche front  groups.
Thousands of elderly people have not been so lucky.
Most cannot obtain free  legal counsel, and even those who can afford a lawyer at the going rate are often  too frightened, confused, or embarrassed to sue.
Many are in such poor health  that even if they did take legal action they probably would not live to see the suit  and the collection process through to the end.
The amount of personal trauma has been enormous.
As of mid-1987 Virginia  state investigators listed 4,500 questionable LaRouchian loan transactions  totaling $30 million in all fifty states and twelve foreign countries.
Of the 3,000  victims in these transactions, about 75 percent are senior citizens, Virginia  Commonwealth attorney Mary Sue Terry told CBS-TV: "We don't know of a  single instance in which the terms of a note have been met in full by one of the  entities that borrowed the money."
(Federal investigators believe that the total  amount bilked from the public may be much higher than $30 million.)
Occasionally a LaRouchian fund-raiser hits the jackpot with a genuinely wealthy  senior citizen.
In 1986 the NCNB National Bank of Florida, trustee for eighty-  year-old retired steel executive Charles Zimmerman, sued the LaRouchians to  recover $2.6 million.
Zimmerman had been induced to loan cash to the Fusion  Energy Foundation and Caucus Distributors, transfer stock to the FEF, and  purchase a limited partnership in a Maryland radio station controlled by the  LaRouchians.
Some victims were disoriented by painful illnesses.
Norman Flaningam, seventy-  four, a Washington attorney dying of cancer, had turned over more than  $100,000.
In return, the LaRouchians gave him free copies of EIR special reports  and a box of chocolates on St. Valentine's Day, with a handwritten note "to a  wonderful patriot."
His daughter recalled coming into his room near the end and  finding him in a distraught state, begging the LaRouchians on the telephone to  return his money.
Carl Swanson, sixty-one, a stroke victim, was taken for $7,000 in credit-card  charges.
His wife and son told the Baltimore Sun how he had received calls from  LaRouchian fundraiser Rochelle Ascher every five or ten minutes for hours at a  time.
His wife first learned about it when she discovered him "crying and  trembling" on the phone.
She picked up the receiver and heard Ascher tell him it  was "his patriotic duty" to give money.
Mrs. Swanson told Ascher not to call  again, but Ascher persisted, disguising her voice and giving false names.
Elizabeth Rose, an eighty-four-year-old widow who lived alone in a Pennsylvania  retirement village, was relieved of over $1 million, mostly in stocks.
Her daughter,  Nancy Day, explains that Mrs. Rose had made large contributions to Ronald  Reagan's 1984 reelection campaign.
In February 1986 the LaRouchians  contacted her, saying they had obtained her name from a fundraising list.
They  told her about the drug menace, the AIDS menace, the Soviet menace, and the  various plots against Lyndon LaRouche's life.
Soon they were at her doorstep  with videotapes of LaRouche's speeches.
Cautiously at first, they induced her to  donate money via her credit card, a thousand or two thousand dollars at a time.
Don't tell your children, they warned her.
Your children don't care about you, they  just want to put you on a shelf.
"It all happened very fast, in less than a month,"  said Mrs. Day.
"They opened my mother up like a flower."
When the LaRouchians learned that Mrs. Rose was a major stockholder in  Church & Dwight (the manufacturers of Arm & Hammer baking soda), they  induced her to turn over 92,000 shares that had been passed down in the family  for generations.
Her daughters found out and intervened.
Although the  LaRouchians had sold much of the stock as soon as they received it, the family  was eventually able to retrieve about a third.
"My mother clearly didn't know what  she was doing," says Mrs. Day.
"In the middle of all this I was talking to her, right  in her bedroom.
She said, 'All my stock belongs to you kids.'
She was not aware  she had given it away."
When Mrs. Day and her two sisters went to court in Bucks County, Pennsylvania,  to seek a guardian for their mother, the LaRouche organization urged Mrs. Rose  to fight them.
When the court case began, her behavior became increasingly  erratic.
"Some days I was a friend, other days the enemy," says her daughter.
"She told me the LaRouchians had promised to send her to the moon and that  she hoped to be the first grandmother on Mars," The LaRouchians introduced  Mrs. Rose to a nationwide telephone support network of elderly LaRouche  followers, all of whom were in conflict with their children regarding donations to  LaRouche, "When the trial began, she got calls from old people as far away as  Alaska," said her daughter.
Mrs. Rose's attorneys called as their expert Dr.  Judianne Densen-Gerber, the former Odyssey House director who had spoken at  LaRouchian anti-drug rallies.
She testified that Mrs. Rose was perfectly able to  conduct her own affairs.
The judge was unconvinced, especially after Mrs. Rose  told the court her views on the Rockefeller family and dope dealing.
He ruled that  Mrs. Rose had been the victim of "designing persons" and appointed her  daughters as guardians of her financial affairs.
The LaRouchians then sent Mrs. Rose on a tour of Italy, presenting her to the  media as a victim of an American "reign of terror" against the elderly.
NCLC  literature described how happy she fell to give money to LaRouche.
New  Solidarity made her into a heroine with headlines like "Elizabeth Rose Inspires  Audiences" and "Patriotic 84-Year-Old Begins Tour for Seniors' Rights."
Back from Italy, Mrs. Rose began her political career in earnest.
She went to  cadre school once a week, and counseled other elderly LaRouche contributors  by phone.
She testified before LaRouche's fact-finding commission set up to  prove that he and other indicted members of the NCLC were victims of a political  witchhunt.
She went to a "thank you" reception in Leesburg where elderly donors  were served sherry and allowed to chat briefly with LaRouche.
Prosecutors in the  loan fraud cases say that LaRouche's mansion serves "the world's most  expensive glass of sherry."
"My mother used to have a great sense of humor," said Mrs. Day, "but she hasn't  laughed since she met those people.
They've filled her with hate.
They told her  we only want her money."
In effect, the LaRouchians had become her mother's  "surrogate children."
Seducing her first with flowers and attention, they had     offered her an illusory sense of personal fulfillment as an "organizer" of other  vulnerable senior citizens.
"They'd suck out her eyeballs if they could," Mrs. Day  said.
NCLC defector Charles Tate, a federal witness in the Boston case, said the  treatment of Mrs. Rose, Mrs. Beynen, and other senior citizens reflects an  increasing recklessness within the LaRouche organization, Tate recalls the first  months of the big fund-raising push in 1 984.
"It was crystal clear to every single  member.
.
.
that the organization would never be able to pay back [the] gargantuan  amounts of loans...." he said.
"And quite frankly, nobody really cared."
Internal NCLC memos seized by federal authorities in their October 1986 raid on  LaRouche's headquarters reveal the predatory mentality of the fundraisers.
A  May 1986 memo described how a Louisiana oil worker took out a $90,000  mortgage on his home and lent the organization over $100,000 during a period  when three LaRouche fundraisers were courting him.
But he started asking for  his money back because of the influence of his girlfriend (described as a "raving  witch").
The memo examined ways to avoid full repayment.
"If we are going to  offer him a schedule which we can't keep," it suggested, "we might just as well  call his bluff now and get it over with."
It also speculated that it might be best to  pay him $2,000 a week for several weeks just to cool him off.
The memos dealt with what were called "hardship" cases, such as a man in  Alaska who "lent us his life savings and is dependent on us to a high degree," or  the elderly woman "who did everything, including selling her house," and thus  had "no means of support except our beneficence."
In the Orwellian semantics of  the NCLC, these victims were transformed into welfare loafers who should be  grateful to the LaRouchians for grudgingly returning a tiny fraction of their money.
Often there was a steely insensitivity to their plight.
One woman who lent  $60,000 was ridiculed as "the famous hardship case.
.
.
going crazy as usual."
A  man who lent $17,000 and was having his wages garnished by the IRS was  described as "going bananas."
One destitute lender was said to have "nowhere  to go besides us to cover living expenses and the mortgage on his house....He's  hysterical."
Another was called a "psycho" and a "troublemaker" because she  demanded her money back.
Meanwhile, the massive sums raised were being used to build up LaRouche's  real estate and other commercial holdings in Leesburg.
The organization spent  millions of dollars on industrial lots, a summer camp, a radio station, a weekly  newspaper, and a 4,550-acre paramilitary training facility in the Blue Ridge  Mountains as the bulk of the NCLC national staff of about two hundred people  moved into Loudoun County in 1984-85, When Lyn and Helga decided they  needed a larger estate, the organization persuaded David Nick Anderson, an  Oklahoma oilman, to put up $400,000 and finance $900,000 for the purchase of  Ibykus Farm, a 171 -acre estate with a fourteen-room manor house.
Three     LaRouche fundraising entities tlien kicked in almost $1 million for improvements,  which included a swimming pool, riding ring, horse barn, and landscaping.
But the LaRouchians, with all their aspirations to public influence and eventual  mass leadership, were unable to win many minds and hearts in Loudoun County.
At first they provided jobs for local residents, but the paychecks soon began to  bounce and many employees quit.
Hundreds of checks to contractors and  merchants also bounced.
Although a few local ultraconservatives were willing to  deal secretly with LaRouche, most residents were soon fed up.
If the  LaRouchians were not squabbling with the sheriff's office over their applications  for concealed-weapons permits, they were battling with the local zoning board  over their right to operate a children's day camp.
Their newly founded Loudoun  County News tried to whip up hysteria among local small businessmen over a  nonexistent plot by county officials to drive them out of business.
The  LaRouchians threatened the life of a female attorney (who promptly fled town),  sued a jeweler for libel, and published smears against families who had lived in  the county for generations.
The nadir probably was reached when LaRouche  called the local Garden Society a nest of KGB agents.
The move to Leesburg turned out to be the biggest miscalculation the  LaRouchians had yet made.
In New York they had been protected by the  anonymity of big-city life, their power over Roy Cohn, and the reluctance of  prosecutors to tangle with them.
But in Leesburg, population 8,000, their  intimidation tactics and deadbeat attitude toward paying bills were much more  conspicuous, "It was like they moved into a fishbowl and turned on the lights,"  says Loudoun Times-Mirror reporter Bryan Chitwood.
Before long, the Times-  Mirror and a member of the county board of supervisors, Frank Raflo, were  raising public question about the antics of LaRouche and his followers, while a  wide range of citizens contacted the sheriff's office with varied complaints.
Don  Moore, the deputy sheriff in charge of the investigation, began to sense the  nationwide and international scope of the swindles emanating from the NCLC  headquarters in downtown Leesburg across from the colonial courthouse.
A  Vietnam veteran, he looked at the office building filled with LaRouche entities and  thought that the time to take that hill had come.
But he ran into the usual  stonewall when he tried to interest the FBI and other federal authorities.
The first breakthrough came in Massachusetts.
In the fall of 1984 the Boston FBI  had received complaints that suggested a pattern of credit-card fraud by  organizations linked to LaRouche.
A federal grand jury was convened in  November.
At first, the investigation proceeded slowly: The FBI and the U.S.  Attorney's office had no idea of the magnitude of LaRouche's fundraising  operation or its bewildering network of corporate shells.
The LaRouchians  allegedly sent potential witnesses to hide in Europe, destroyed documents, and  refused to honor subpoenas.
But when LaRouche followers scored big in the  1986 Illinois Democratic primaries, newspapers around the country began to pay  more attention to LaRouche's finances.
Elderly victims and their relatives read     these articles and came forward with complaints.
Authorities in state after state  launched investigations.
Meanwhile, First Fidelity Bank's civil racketeering suit against LaRouche pierced  his corporate veil, while U.S. Attorney William Weld in Boston appointed an  assistant with special qualifications to prosecute the credit-card fraud case.
This  prosecutor, John Markham, had once represented in private practice a wealthy  California cult, the Process Church of the Final Judgment.
Markham knew how  cults operate and how their members think.
He also knew the key to cracking a  case against a cult-like organization: Find defectors, offer them immunity, and get  them to lead you to more defectors.
The LaRouchians seemed unaware that they had passed into the danger zone.
After all, had they not outwitted the authorities a hundred times and always with  impunity?
Their sense of invulnerability was so brazen that when they brought a  New Jersey attorney to Boston to defend them in the credit-card fraud  investigation, they paid for his airline ticket via an unauthorized credit-card  charge.
(He resigned from the case when the Justice Department informed him  of this fact.)
In Leesburg every Wednesday evening, a shredding machine at  LaRouche headquarters destroyed bank statements, canceled checks, and other  documents — as many as ten thirty-gallon bags' worth each week.
But no one  thought to destroy the Security staff notebooks and financial memos that  described and gloated over the NCLC's machinations in extraordinary detail.
The  NCLC leadership was preoccupied with raising as much money as possible, as  fast as possible, seemingly regardless of the risk.
In an August 1986 briefing,  Helga LaRouche ordered members to raise $750,000 in five days by focusing on  "money questions as the absolutely necessary logistics" to defeat the evil  oligarchy.
"For us," she said, money represents "the bullets, the guns, laser  weapons, and other kinds of weapons, which we absolutely need."
The LaRouche organization would need criminal lawyers more than laser guns.
In October 1986, ten LaRouchians, including four of LaRouche's top aides, were  indicted in Boston federal court for credit-card fraud and obstruction of justice.
Several more LaRouchians were subsequently added to the Boston indictment,  and in February 1987, a Virginia grand jury indicted sixteen for securities fraud.
In March, New York State indicted fifteen for securities fraud, grand larceny, and  conspiracy, including LaRouche's closest lieutenants, Ed and Nancy Spannaus.
At least twelve states meanwhile obtained cease-and-desist orders against  LaRouche fund-raising entities.
On July 2, 1987, LaRouche himself was indicted  in Boston for obstruction of justice.
The first conviction was obtained in December 1987: Roy Frankhouser, tried  separately from the other Boston defendants, was found guilty of obstructing  justice.
That same month the main Boston trial began.
Although it ended in a  mistrial, a replay was scheduled for early 1989.
Meanwhile, a federal grand jury  in Alexandria was considering massive evidence of loan and tax fraud, and the     LaRouchians themselves predicted it would hand down a "grand slam series of  indictments."
In October 1988, after a probe lasting almost two years, LaRouche  and six followers (including Ed Spannaus and chief fundraiser William Wertz)  were indicted on thirteen counts of mail fraud, income tax fraud, and conspiracy.
The indictment charged them with obtaining over $34 million in fraudulent loans  between 1983 and 1987 (they denied all charges, claiming that harassment and  seizure of records by authorities prevented their repaying loans).
If convicted,  LaRouche faced up to sixty-five years in jail and fines of $3.25 million.
If LaRouche were the head of an ordinary criminal conspiracy, motivated simply  by greed, he would have been washed up long before the 1988 indictments.
His  associates would have offered to cut deals with the prosecutors to inform on  each other and the boss himself.
But the LaRouchians are an ideological  movement with an intense collective spirit.
Such movements often function most  vigorously when under attack, even when their top leaders are in jail or exile.
By  early 1988 most law enforcement officials no longer believed the LaRouchian  leadership would collapse under fear of jail sentences.
In an update report on the  NCLC, the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith noted its "resilience" and  "quick recovery."
Whenever NCLC members were indicted, authorities found that  within days many of the indicted people were back on the phones raising money.
Their bravado was expressed in comparisons between their fundraising methods  and those of Benjamin Franklin and George Washington.
The Founding Fathers,  NCLC publications maintained, had resorted to a prototype of "credit-card fraud"  to save the American Revolution!
The adaptability of the LaRouchians was also seen when the Justice Department  brought involuntary bankruptcy proceedings against three entities that had  refused to pay contempt-of-court fines of over $16 million.
(The fines had been  accruing daily for over a year, ever since the entities defied a Boston grand jury  subpoena of their financial records.)
A federal judge in Alexandria placed them  under the control of interim trustees, but when U.S. marshals seized the firms'  sixty-five known bank accounts, all but $20,000 was gone.
And when the  marshals seized the firms' offices and publications, the latter just reopened under  new names: New Solidarity as The New Federalist, and Fusion as Twenty-First  Century Science and Technology In addition, the firms moved their telephone  boiler rooms to private apartments also to operate under new names.
In late  1987, federal authorities estimated the LaRouche money machine was still  raising $2.5 million a month.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
PART NINE: LaRouche, Inc.: The  Underworld Connection   Inspector MacDonald smiled, and his eyelid quivered . . . "I won't  conceal from you, Mr. Holmes, that we think in the C.I.D. that you  have a wee bit of a bee in your bonnet over this professor  [Moriarty]. "
-The Valley of Fear   Chapter Thirty-four   The War on Drugs, So Called   LaRouche may not have originally intended to build an organization resembling  an underworld enterprise, but he certainly took steps tending in that direction.
First, he gathered a band of ruthless lieutenants, who acknowledged that he was  the "boss" and defined their identities in terms of his approval.
Second, he found  out how the underworld actually works (money laundering and drug smuggling,  for instance) from former government experts and by studying the careers of  master criminals such as Meyer Lansky.
Third, he constructed a good cover story  that seemed to explain that what he was doing was quite legal.
Fourth, he built  up alliances with established organizations, such as the Teamsters union, which  had the connections, resources, and expertise he lacked.
Like Sherlock Holmes's great adversary.
Professor Moriarty--the fictional  prototype of an intellectual underworld leader-LaRouche approached his  activities with the mind of a strategist and grasped the key problem: how to  develop an in-depth shield against prosecution, including a fail-safe system for  times when the ordinary deceptions no longer suffice by themselves.
The solution he most favored was to associate himself with the U.S. intelligence  community.
It was well known that the CIA and other federal agencies had long  collaborated with and protected crooks so long as the latter were useful in  fighting communism (for instance, Santos Trafficante, Jr., against Fidel Castro).
In The Case of Walter Lippmann, LaRouche observed that the most successful  narcotics traffickers are those linked to government agencies responsible for  investigating the drug trade.
These agencies, to protect their criminal associates,  use "the 'under investigation' fiction" to steer "regular, unwitting police agencies"  away from any "interference with the drug-network operations."
Although  LaRouche buried this point in a critique of both the crooks and the intelligence     community, he soon proceeded to hire as his adviser the often arrested but never  convicted IVIitch WerBell, who boasted of using his Langley connections to gain  immunity.
Years later, under investigation for credit-card fraud, LaRouche's  followers would allegedly attempt a variation of WerBell's method--to persuade  the CIA, through intermediaries, to quash a federal investigation of LaRouche.
The development of a smoke screen for LaRouche's activities can be traced back  to the founding of the National Anti-Drug Coalition in 1978-79.
The NADC's  LaRouchian organizers talked tough.
They were going to lead the American  people in a campaign to "shut down the drug traffic" lock, stock, and barrel.
They  staged rallies and seminars at inner-city churches and high schools, lobbied state  legislatures, held briefings for congressional aides, and published the monthly  War on Drugs.
The apparent sincerity with which they approached this crusade  won them the respect of some law enforcement experts.
An alliance was forged  with Dr. Gabriel Nahas, the anti-pot expert who later became prominent in Nancy  Reagan's crusade against drugs.
Dope, Inc., a 500-page book written by three  LaRouche aides, became a kind of underground bestseller.
The anti-drug rhetoric continued into the 1980s, with LaRouche hurling the  epithet "drug lobbyist" at any reporter who criticized him.
This was his most  audacious deception.
For while conducting his so-called war on drugs, he and his  followers sought alliances with individuals allegedly close to the heroin and  cocaine traffic, including Midwest racketeers and Panama's General Manuel  Noriega.
To facilitate such ties, the LaRouchians surrounded themselves with  consultants, attorneys, business partners, and political allies from the  underworld's fringes.
For instance, when the Illinois attorney general began a  probe of the National Anti-Drug Coalition's fundraising in the early 1980s, the  LaRouchians hired Chicago attorney Victor Ciardelli, reportedly at the  recommendation of the late Roy Cohn.
Ciardelli was later indicted along with  over forty co-conspirators for his involvement in a vast cocaine- and pot-  smuggling operation in the South and Southwest, He was accused of being in  charge of laundering the profits, but received only a year in jail after turning  state's witness.
To develop their own financial operations, the LaRouchians needed detailed  background knowledge.
In 1978 over a dozen NCLC members did library  research for the authors of Dope, Inc., studying the activities of criminal  innovators such as Meyer Lansky and Robert Vesco, whose expertise included  money laundering.
But some things can't be learned from books and  congressional reports.
One of LaRouche's earliest gurus with direct knowledge of  the drug underworld was WerBell.
Although he was touted to the NCLC rank and  file as a veteran government anti-drug fighter, this was a half-truth at best.
His  career as CIA contract employee, private spook, mercenary soldier, and arms  dealer had brought him into tempting contact with criminal elements in the  Caribbean and Southeast Asia's Golden Triangle.
In the early 1970s he achieved  notoriety as the manufacturer of the Ingram MAC-10, which became the     preferred weapon of cocaine traffickers tlirougliout tine Western Hemispliere.
In   1975 a federal grand jury in Miami indicted him as the kingpin of a conspiracy to  smuggle 50,000 pounds of Colombian marijuana a month into Florida--to be  distributed in Detroit, Cleveland, and Chicago.
His co-defendants were John  Nardi, a Cleveland Teamster official and crime boss; Morton Franklin, a  Cleveland insurance man with close ties to organized crime; Gerald  Cunningham, a Florida arms dealer; and William Bell, a former arms salesman.
The investigation began when Kenneth Burnstine, a major Florida cocaine  smuggler facing a seven-year prison sentence, agreed to become a government  informant and impresario of "sting" operations.
Burnstine had formerly been an  arms salesman for WerBell He offered to sell WerBell his smuggling business in  return for a $100,000 commission on each 5,000 pounds of pot.
WerBell  expressed interest, and Burnstine introduced him to DEA agents posing as  smugglers with Colombian connections.
Thus began a seven-month operation  involving twenty-seven federal agents with planes and yachts.
Although the DEA collected fifty-five hours of audiotapes and videotapes linking  WerBell and his cronies to the smuggling plot, the government case was  undermined by the mysterious death of its chief witness.
Only weeks before the   1976 trial, Burnstine was killed when his private plane crashed during a Mojave  Desert air show.
The FBI suspected Nardi, but couldn't prove it.
Without  Burnstine's sworn direct testimony, federal and state prosecutors had to drop  over sixty marijuana- and cocaine-smuggling cases.
The result in the WerBell  trial was a ruling that most of the DEA's tapes of conversations in which  Burnstine was a participant could not be played for the jury.
The defense conceded that WerBell had recruited Bell, who in turn recruited  Cunningham, who brought in Franklin and Nardi.
However, the defense argued,  the purpose hadn't been a smuggling conspiracy at all, but an anti-drug  operation.
The five defendants had played along with Burnstine in their capacity  as drug busters for a government agency so secret that it had no name.
(The  LaRouchians used a variation of this defense in their 1988 Boston trial for credit-  card fraud, claiming their activities had been directed by government agents so  secret they were known only by code names.)
The brunt of the defense was borne by WerBell, whose connections with  government agencies provided the hook on which to hang the drug-fighter  argument.
(His chief attorney was Edwin Marger of Atlanta, who would later  represent LaRouche in a libel suit against Jack Anderson.)
Franklin and Nardi  offered no defense, preferring to rise or fall with WerBell.
Former Nixon aide Egil  Krogh was called as a defense witness, but testified that he'd never heard of the  supersecret drug busters.
Former CIA contract agent Gerald Patrick Hemming,  called to attest to WerBell's commitment to the war on drugs, was himself  arrested during the trial for allegedly smuggling cocaine and marijuana.
Still, the government fought a losing battle without Burnstine and the tapes.
After  ten hours of deliberation, the jury found the defendants not guilty.
The drug-  fighter defense was not the chief factor in this decision.
As prosecutor Karen  Atkinson told the jury: "There's not one scintilla of evidence that.
.
.
any of these  men were working for the U.S. government."
WerBell's attorneys said their client had been unacquainted with the Cleveland  men prior to the indictment, but this argument was rendered dubious by a  separate indictment of Franklin and Cunningham on gunrunning charges.
The  guns were Ingrams purchased from WerBell and were to be smuggled out of the  country via a private Florida airstrip.
Also indicted in the arms case were  Cleveland mobsters Dominick Bartone and Henry ("Boom-Boom") Greece.
Bartone later became a suspect with Morton Franklin in an Ohio bank fraud case.
Greece, described in FBI documents as a "cold-blooded killer," was a close  associate of Nardi.
In addition to Burnstine's death, an extraordinary amount of violence surrounded  these two cases.
One midnight in July 1975, while the sting operation was in  progress, WerBell's partner in the arms business, retired Army Colonel Robert  Bayard, was found dead in an Atlanta shopping center.
He had been executed  with a single shot to the head.
The murder was never solved.
In May 1 977, Nardi  was killed by a dynamite blast in the parking lot of the Cleveland Teamsters' joint  council.
Local media attributed the slaying to mob infighting.
That same month  Boom-Boom Greece was gunned down in his car after visiting the Italian-  American Citizens Club in Cleveland.
(Convicted of the crime was Joseph  Bonarrigo, who had killed Greece after the latter declined to help him make a  bomb to blow up a local businessman who had ordered a mob vending machine  taken off his premises.)
In 1984, Morton Franklin was arrested in Cleveland after  paying $28,000 to an FBI undercover agent for a kilo of cocaine.
Before pleading  guilty to the narcotics charge, he forfeited bail because he allegedly attempted to  hire a hit man to kill the FBI agent, offering to supply plastic explosives and a  silencer as well as to pay $10,000.
If LaRouche planned to associate with such  circles, it was no wonder he felt he needed round-the-clock bodyguards!
A window on WerBell's Southeast Asian and Caribbean connections was opened  in the early 1980s after the collapse of Australia's Nugan Hand Bank, the  suspicious death of one of its two founders, and the disappearance of the other.
Australian authorities launched several probes uncovering links between Nugan  Hand and the CIA, organized crime and heroin traffickers.
The March 1983 report  of the Commonwealth-New South Wales Joint Task Force on Drug Trafficking  listed twenty-six alleged traffickers, several of them former U.S. military officers  and intelligence agents.
Like WerBell, they had been active in the Golden  Triangle during the Vietnam War,   When task-force investigators traveled to Washington they interviewed WerBell  about a consulting fee he had received from Nugan Hand in 1979.
WerBell told     them he had met with Earl Yates, a retired admiral and president of Nugan Hand  International.
They had discussed a plan to resettle Meo tribesmen from Laos on  a small island off Haiti.
The Meo, famed as poppy growers and anti-Communist  fighters, were to become peaceful fishermen.
(Tom Naylor in Hot Money  suggests they really would have become the equivalent of Gurkhas for the  cocaine traffic.)
WerBell said he refused to get involved because the scheme was  "unrealistic."
The LaRouchian inner circle was well aware of WerBell's checkered past.
A 1977  Security staff dossier outlined his involvement with fugitive financier/cocaine  trafficker Robert Vesco and speculated about his possible ties to Florida drug  kingpin Santos Trafficante, Jr.
The dossier described his smuggling trial and  speculated that one of the attorneys had CIA ties.
The Security staffers were  doubtless well aware of the boast made by WerBell (after the government  dropped an earlier case against him for violation of neutrality laws) that the  Company looks after its own.
For the LaRouchians WerBell became a fount of tall tales as well as tips about  the drug traffic.
He also opened doors.
On visits to his Georgia estate, they could  meet key personalities of the violent, semi-psychotic world of gunrunners, drug  smugglers, and CIA rogues-men like Gerald Hemming, who summed up the  WerBell milieu to author A.J. Weberman as "nigger killers in bed with the Mafia  and the Mafia in bed with the FBI and the goddamn CIA in bed with all of them."
In 1978 LaRouche commissioned the writing of Dope, Inc., which purported to be  a study of how the drug traffic worked.
Over a dozen NCLC Security and  intelligence staffers were assigned to the project, which furnished a rationale for  gathering as much technical information as possible about smuggling and money  laundering, WerBell personally provided much of the background on Southeast  Asia.
The LaRouchians also drew on the knowledge of Walt Mackem, a WerBell  crony and former CIA narcotics expert.
Mackem regarded the LaRouchians as  crazy but was willing to take their money.
Another tutor in the late 1 970s was Mafia drug banker Michele Sindona.
After the  collapse of his Franklin National Bank, he talked to many reporters about his  woes.
Members of the Security staff would stroll down the street from NCLC  headquarters to chat with him at the Pierre Hotel, where he lived while awaiting  trial.
Vivian Syvriotis, LaRouche's former mistress, was the NCLC member  delegated to meet most often with Sindona.
"To the [NCLC] leadership," writes  Kevin Coogan, a former member of the intelligence staff, "Sindona was the very  model of a 'pro-development banker.'
They continued to tell us he was a good  guy even when it became obvious he was involved in the heroin trade."
(In 1980,  Sindona was found guilty of fraud and embezzlement and was sentenced to  twenty-five years in prison.
Extradited to Italy on a murder charge, he died in his  cell of cyanide poisoning.
The Sicilian Mafia is widely believed to have ordered  his death.)
The research for Dope, Inc. also enabled the LaRouchians to gather insights  from law enforcement experts and to profile them in the process.
One such  source was Jack Cusack, former head of international operations for the Drug  Enforcement Administration.
Cusack had numerous meetings and phone  conversations with the LaRouchians, especially with Marilyn James of the Dope,  Inc. project, between 1978 and 1981.
He recalled them as being "well informed"  about the narcotics traffic, with excellent law enforcement contacts.
"Sometimes  they told me things I didn't know, but it turned out it was true," he said.
As a result of their research, the Dope, Inc. authors zeroed in on Resorts  International, the leisure conglomerate best known for its casino in Atlantic City,  New Jersey, and its Paradise Island resort in the Bahamas.
"Resorts  International equals big-time drug trafficking," alleged the 1979 first edition of  Dope, Inc., which also attacked Intertel, a Resorts-linked private spook outfit  headed at the time by rivals of WerBell.
Some of the research was turned over to  New Jersey state investigators.
Willis Carlo's Spotlight, which carried the NCLC  findings in a 1978 series, boasted that the material had helped to persuade the  state attorney's office to issue findings sharply critical of Resorts (although the  LaRouchian allegation of links to the drug traffic were never substantiated).
When New Jersey authorities were considering a permanent license for the  Resorts casino in 1979, the NCLC staged a protest rally in Trenton and vowed a  statewide campaign.
This effort petered out after the NCLC-controlled  Computron Technologies Corporation landed a contract with Resorts to design  software for its development division.
A Resorts spokesman, contacted in 1980,  said Resorts had been unaware of Computron's connection to LaRouche and  that the contract was in no sense a payoff.
Yet a number of individuals involved  in the Computron contract (or their spouses) had previously been involved in the  anti-Resorts publicity campaign and intelligence gathering.
Gus Kalimtgis,  founder and chief stockholder of Computron, was the senior author of Dope, Inc.
and had been the keynote speaker at the Trenton rally.
Yoram Gelman, the  Computron systems analyst who wrote the programs for Resorts' Wang VS-2200  computer, was the husband of LaRouche campaign treasurer Felice Merritt  Gelman, who co-authored a purported expose of Resorts ("Organized Crime  Goes Legit") in the December 12, 1978, Executive Intelligence Review.
The  article attempted to prove that Resorts controlled many top politicians in New  Jersey.
Mark Stahlman, a Computron vice president and its registered agent in  New Jersey, was formerly the NCLC Security staff's electronics specialist.
He  was thanked in the acknowledgment section of Dope, Inc. for unspecified  "contributions" to the book.
Fletcher James, Computron vice president in charge  of systems, was the husband of Marilyn James, Jack Cusack's contact.
Dope,  Inc.'s authors listed her as one of three key researchers who "supplied the core"  of the book.
But the main benefit of the Dope, Inc. research perhaps lay not in finding out  juicy facts about this or that corporation but in learning the methods of organized     criminal activity--metliods tliat could be useful in building a white-collar empire.
For instance, the year after Dope, Inc.'s publication, one of its authors, NCLC  staff economist David Goldman, published a New Solidarity article based on  information not included in the book.
It was a technical discussion of how drug  money is supposedly passed "directly through the commercial banking system,"  and how the intelligence community allegedly participates in covering up such  practices.
"The international narcotics bosses' agents-in-place in the wire transfer  and computer rooms of major banks 'switch' the funds into special 'dummy  accounts' at these banks," wrote Goldman.
He added that "we know the names  of these agents at several large banks, but choose not to name them at this  time."
Goldman described the techniques of wire transfer fraud as being "simple-  mindedly easy."
Curiously, the LaRouche organization had previously been sued  by the Bank of Nova Scotia and Chase Manhattan Bank because of mysterious  errors in wire transfers between various LaRouchian accounts.
In each case the  decimal points had been shifted to the right, transforming hundreds of dollars into  tens of thousands of dollars.
The error happened twice with Chase in a four-day  period.
The litigation involved instances in which the LaRouchians withdrew the  money from the receiving account before the bank discovered the error, and then  refused to return it.
An affidavit by LaRouche aide Warren Hamerman indicated  that many such wire transfer glitches had occurred to LaRouchian accounts  across the country, Hamerman said the NCLC should not be required to repay  the money, because the errors were really donations by individuals who did not  wish their identities known.
He also charged that the lawsuits were political  warfare against his organization instigated by powerful persons.
The political  wrapping to LaRouche's financial manipulations was already coming in handy.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Thirty-six  Fishing for Piranhas     No sooner was the ink dry on Fitzsimmons' letter in Tine International Teamster  than the peekaboo game started again.
The Local 299 leaders in Detroit who had  supported the anti-LaRouche (really, anti-McMaster) resolution continued to  allow stacks of New Solidarity in the union hall and copies of EIR in the waiting  room of the business office.
McMaster continued his support of LaRouche,  although in a low-profile way.
In a January 1980 telephone interview, he  described LaRouche as "the most intelligent of all the [presidential]  candidates. "
As for Fitzsimmons' letter, McMaster said that "individual locals can  support whoever they like.
...The Teamster union is one of the most democratic  goddamn outfits in America."
He claimed that some locals were considering an  endorsement of LaRouche and that he personally had discussed it with union  officials in Florida.
"People like it that he's in the Democratic Party now,"  McMaster explained, referring to LaRouche's decision in the fall of 1979 to  jettison the U.S. Labor Party and enter the Democratic primaries.
McMaster's support for LaRouche may have had self-interested motives.
A  Federal Election Commission schedule of receipts and expenditures filed by  Citizens for LaRouche (CFL) shows that a few days after opening LaRouche's  New Hampshire campaign headquarters in September 1979, CFL began making  payments to Project Consulting Services Co. of Southfield, Michigan.
The firm  was headed by John R. Ferris, McMaster's closest friend and~according to The  Hoffa Wars--h\s reputed business partner in several ventures.
CFL paid Project  Consulting over $96,000 during 1979-80 to oversee LaRouche's New Hampshire  primary bid.
One of the experts sent in by Ferris was a former Michigan state  senator, Edward J. Robinson, who had just been sentenced to six months in  federal prison for his role in a $3 million Florida land swindle.
While appealing his  case (he lost the appeal in 1 981 ), he directed CFL's volunteer operations and  handled press relations.
Ferris says he was reluctant to get involved with the LaRouche campaign but  they offered him a fee so high he "couldn't say no," He previously had done  consulting for other candidates, but set up Project Consulting exclusively to work  for LaRouche, However, the latter adopted tactics that alienated the voters  instead of following Ferrisi pragmatic advice.
After New Hampshire, Ferris  stopped working for LaRouche.
He said that CFL owed him $200,000, although  he doubted he would ever collect.
(The CFL's FEC filings never listed this debt.)
Ferris and Robinson were not the only colorful characters attracted to the New  Hampshire campaign.
According to a former top LaRouche aide, the NCLC     leadership paid $100,000 to IVIancliester businessman George Kattar to attempt  to fix tine election in Dixville Notch, traditionally the first place in the state to have  its election returns reported.
The FBI regards Kattar as a leader of organized  crime in New Hampshire.
At a U.S. Senate hearing in 1 971 , a witness identified  him as a loan shark and said that his business was nicknamed the "Piranha  Company."
LaRouche later referred to the vote-fixing idea as the "have a hundred-dollar bill"  plan, and blamed its failure on an aide.
NCLC defectors say it had to have been  LaRouche's own idea, pointing out that no policy decisions were ever made in  the NCLC without his approval.
The cash to pay Kattar supposedly came from a  Bank Bumiputra Malaysia loan involving several LaRouche business fronts.
In  1981 the bank filed suit in New York State Supreme Court after the LaRouchians  defaulted on the notes-just the beginning of what would be a decade of loan  defaults.
Kattar was interviewed about the incident for NBC-TV's First Camera in  1984, and acknowledged that the LaRouchians had asked him for help in the  primary.
He said two of his employees worked for LaRouche for a month, but quit  when they were not paid the full amount promised.
He denied personally  receiving any money from LaRouche.
In 1986 Kattar was indicted in Boston on  extortion charges; the victim, ironically, was the cult-like Church of Scientology.
The FBI then raided Kattar's home and office as part of an arms-smuggling  probe, seizing ammunition and weapons.
The Federal Election Commission audit division reported in 1981 that LaRouche  had overspent his allowable maximum in New Hampshire and should pay back  $1 12,000 of his matching funds to the U.S. Treasury.
Several matters regarding  LaRouche's campaign financing were forwarded to the FEC's general counsel for  further investigation.
Citizens for LaRouche (CFL) counterattacked with a suit in  federal court in Manhattan seeking to stop the FEC from questioning LaRouche  contributors.
CFL's attorney in this action was Mayer Morganroth of Southfield,  Michigan.
According to The Hoffa Wars, Morganroth is a former business partner  of Ferris and has represented McMaster in legal matters.
In the mid-1970s  Morganroth and Ferris (with McMaster allegedly as a silent partner) owned  Leiand House, a Detroit hotel where they provided living quarters and part-time  jobs for two of McMaster's muscle men during the months of fierce Teamster  infighting prior to Hoffa's disappearance.
In 1977 Morganroth's name surfaced in connection with a Miami Organized  Crime Strike Force investigation into a dubious loan by the mob-controlled  Teamsters' Central States Pension Fund to the Indico Corporation, a financially  ailing Florida real estate firm in which Morganroth was a principal stockholder.
This investigation was a spin-off from a strike force probe into the business  dealings of the Southeastern Florida district council of the Laborers International  Union.
(One upshot of the Laborers union probe was a racketeering indictment of  Santos Trafficante, Jr., and fifteen co-conspirators, including a Miami lawyer who  had helped arrange the Indico loan.)
According to The Wall Street Journal,     Morganroth was also under investigation in 1977 by tine Detroit Strike Force, as  part of a probe into "alleged organized crime proceeds being tunneled from  Canada into the U.S." He denied any wrongdoing.
Morganroth became one of the LaRouche organization's chief lawyers.
He  defended them in the 1983 anti-racketeering civil suit brought by creditor Michael  Hudson, helped them incorporate a number of fundraising fronts, and was part of  their defense team in the Boston credit-card fraud trial in 1988.
Apart from the "Southfield, Michigan, advisers," as LaRouche called them, a  number of Teamster officials continued to work with LaRouche.
The president of  an Illinois local was reported by New Solidarity to have run on LaRouche's  delegate slate in the state's 1980 Democratic primary, and a "Special Teamster  Edition" of CFL's Campaign News that spring showed a picture of LaRouche with  Bill Bounds, president of Illinois' Joint Council 65.
Bounds was quoted as saying,  while introducing LaRouche to a monthly council meeting: "I want you to meet my  dear friend Lyn LaRouche, who's been a friend of labor and of the Teamsters for  years....He deserves your support for the Presidency."
The back of the newsletter  contained a picture of Rolland McMaster and the full text of his May 1979  endorsement.
LaRouche also sought campaign support from the mob-dominated Laborers  Union.
In his initial approach he addressed the legitimate economic worries of the  Laborers and other construction unions, as well as the special problems of  indicted leaders.
As in his support for the Teamsters on the question of trucking  deregulation, he seemed to make sense in a demagogic way.
He talked about  the slump in housing starts due to high interest rates (chairman of the Federal  Reserve Board Paul Volcker's fault) and the slowdown in nuclear power plant  construction (the fault of hippies, Yippies, Quakers, and Communists).
LaRouche  suggested he'd string up Volcker, crush the environmentalists, and build  hundreds of nuclear plants.
Several weeks before the Democratic convention, a  group of California building trades officials, including several from the Laborers,  announced their support for LaRouche and launched a campaign committee.
New Solidarity reported a similar committee being formed in Ohio.
This triggered  a memo from Alexander E. Barkan, national director of the AFL-CIO's Committee  on Political Education (COPE), to union leaders around the country.
Noting the  reports that "some local union and local council officials not only have attended  meetings convened by LaRouche, but have permitted their names to be used,"  Barkan warned that the LaRouche organization was "anti-labor, anti-Catholic,  anti-Semitic and anti-minorities."
However, LaRouche had a way to get around Barkan~by providing aid to  indicted labor racketeers whom the AFL-CIO had washed its hands of.
In 1980-  81 the Justice Department closed in on a number of top labor leaders from coast  to coast.
Building trades officials, including Laborers president Angelo Fosco,  were indicted, as were a number of the most notorious Teamster leaders.
In New     York, International Longshoremen's Association vice president Anthony Scotto  was indicted and convicted.
The bribery sting operations code-named Brilab  (bribery-labor) resulted in indictments in the South and Southwest of union  leaders, public officials, and major crime lords such as Trafficante (Florida),  Carlos Marcello (Gulf coast), and Anthony Accardo (Chicago).
This gave  LaRouche an opportunity to expand his connections.
His followers could do  publicity work for the defendants-encouraging a political fight-back against sting  operations on civil liberties grounds~and also cadge investigative assignments to  probe the backgrounds of Federal witnesses and prosecutors.
According to ex-  NCLC members, some LaRouchians began to talk not just to Teamster  hoodlums but also directly to the organized crime families.
They had now  established the possibility of a real alliance.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Thirty-seven   How to Win Friends and Influence Hoodlums   To maintain contacts witli persons linked to organized crime.
LaRouclie liad to  justify it first to liis own followers.
This turned out to be not very hard to do:  LaRouche simply announced that "many of the persons and circles which are  reputed to be associated with the Mafia are good people."
These "good"  mobsters, he explained, personally disapprove of the drug traffic but are infected  with a pragmatism that causes them to continue to make deals and keep peace  with the Zionist ("Drug Mafia") wing of organized crime.
LaRouche claimed to  have met with a "top official" of the Laborers Union to convince him to break with  the Zionist drug pushers, but without success.
This official, along with other  members of the "good" faction, refused to understand that the Brilab  prosecutions were an attempt by the "bad" Mafia in alliance with the government  to destroy the good Mafia and take over the latter's empire.
The good Mafia  could defeat this Zionist plot only by taking the offensive--by turning the  courtroom fight into a political fight.
But because of its pragmatism, the good  Mafia was reluctant to do this.
The NCLC therefore would have to do it for them.
Indeed, the NCLC was their "last political bastion of resistance."
If it should fail in  its historic task, then the "honest trade-unionists" linked to the good Mafia (e.g.,  the Laborers and Teamsters) would "be picked off by [Justice Department] task-  forces like flies."
This was all for internal NCLC consumption.
Doubtless the proposition was put to  the organization's new "Sun Belt allies" in a more businesslike fashion.
Certainly  in the NCLC's public attacks on Brilab there was no mention of good or bad  Mafias, only of honest trade unionists.
This was most noticeable in the two cases  involving really big organized crime figures: the New Orleans indictment of  Marcello for conspiring to bribe public officials and the Miami indictment of  Trafficante, Accardo, Fosco, and thirteen co-conspirators for labor racketeering.
New Solidarity carefully avoided mentioning the names of Marcello, Trafficante,  and Accardo.
Instead, it mentioned only the indicted union officials, whom it  described as victims of "the most widespread witch-hunt ever attempted against  American labor."
Once again, LaRouche was using code language~"labor" for Mafia, just as  earlier he had used "British" for Jewish~to sanitize a morally repulsive message.
He was also borrowing Jimmy Hoffa's old tactic of depicting racketeering  prosecutions as an employer attack on the labor movement, akin to  strikebreaking and lockouts.
This pseudo-militant dodge used class-against-class  rhetoric in an attempt to divert the labor movement's (and the public's) attention  away from the real issues at trial.
In March 1981, New Jersey Teamster boss Tony Provenzano's brothers, Sammy  and Nuncio, went on trial in Newark federal court for racketeering.
Despite the  massive evidence of Mafia control of many New Jersey locals, and irrespective of  Tony Pro's multiple convictions for murder, extortion, and racketeering (he was  serving a life sentence).
New Solidarity portrayed all three brothers as labor  martyrs.
The trial of Sammy and Nuncio was a "shocking farce."
The Justice  Department was "attempting a classic frame-up."
The jury was presented with  the "spectacle" of "bought-and-paid-for" witnesses.
When Nuncio was convicted,  this was proof of the "near impossibility" of labor leaders receiving a fair trial in  the face of the Justice Department's "politically motivated" vendetta.
(Nuncio was  sentenced to ten years, Sammy Pro was found guilty in a subsequent  racketeering trial and sentenced to four years.
In 1984, federal judge Harold  Ackerman ordered that their Local 560 be placed in the hands of a trustee.
The  Provenzanos had engaged, he said, in "a multifaceted orgy of criminal activity.")
Another of New Solidarity's alleged witch-hunt victims was Frank Sheeran,  president of Teamster Local 326 in Wilmington, Delaware.
This was the same  Frank Sheeran who, according to federal investigators, drove to the Pontiac,  Michigan, airport on the morning of July 30, 1975 (the day Jimmy Hoffa  disappeared) to pick up three Genovese crime family enforcers.
In September  1979 a Philadelphia grand jury charged Sheeran with two murders, four  attempted murders, embezzlement, and a bombing, naming Pennsylvania crime  bosses Russell Bufalino and Angelo Bruno as unindicted co-conspirators.
Although Sheeran was acquitted in this trial, he was indicted shortly afterward in  Wilmington on labor racketeering and mail fraud charges.
New Solidarity  denounced the Delaware prosecution as a "frame-up attempt" and the chief  government witness as a "rat."
Failing to inform its readers of the substance of  the charges in either the Philadelphia or the Wilmington case.
New Solidarity  hailed Sheeran as "a labor leader committed to policies of growth and  development for the United States."
Sheeran and NCLC Baltimore leader Larry  Freeman held a press conference.
After complaining about the alleged frame-up,  Sheeran gave Freeman the floor to attack the International Socialists, a small  non-Communist sect active in the TDU.
Freeman accused the group of plotting  with the government to undermine Sheeran and other "respected and traditional  labor leaders."
But in October 1981 a federal jury found Sheeran guilty on eleven  counts, including conspiracy, labor racketeering, mail fraud, obstruction of justice,  and taking bribes from an employer.
He was sentenced to eighteen years in  federal prison.
While engaging in this dubious propaganda campaign in 1981, the LaRouchians  were gaining Executive Intelligence Review interviews with cabinet members and  top Republican lawmakers in Washington.
EIR obtained an interview with  Senator Orrin Hatch (R.-Utah), chairman of the Senate Labor Committee.
The  interviewer asked Hatch leading questions about Brilab in an attempt to elicit  answers that could be useful to the anti-Brilab campaign or that would show that     the LaRouchians had clout with the senator.
But Hatch artfully ducked the  questions and gave innocuous answers.
The NCLC launched the Committee Against Brilab and Abscam (CABA) to solicit  funds from people with a vested interest in stymieing the federal strike forces.
(Abscam, short for "Arab scam," was the code name for a series of FBI bribery  sting operations targeting members of Congress and utilizing an FBI agent  dressed as an Arab sheikh.)
A press statement by the Detroit-and-Houston-  based committee announced that a "prestigious roster of labor leaders" had  joined CABA's advisory board.
Heading the list was Rolland McMaster, followed  by IBT Joint Council 65 leader Bill Bounds (who later said his name had been  used without permission) and several construction union officials.
The advisory board's "Statement of Principles" included an affirmation of support  for a CABA "Trust" which would solicit funds to provide defendants with legal  assistance and to "research background material and provide investigators for  attorneys and publications."
(The "investigators," naturally, were to come from  the NCLC Security staff in New York and the McMaster-linked Detroit NCLC.)
The first public advocacy pamphlet was entitled Brilab-Abscam: Union-Busting in  America.
Filled with vigorous denunciations of "snitches" and "stool-pigeons," it  warned that Brilab was part of an undeclared war against the "American  System," orchestrated by the Trilateral Commission and other Eastern  Establishment forces.
"The targeted victims.
.
.
are America's unionized workers  and their friends in business and politics--the machinery that makes America  work," the pamphlet claimed, adding that "no crime in America.
.
.
is more  organized than that run by the U.S. Justice Department [and] its 13 Organized  Crime Strike Forces."
Ironically, this pamphlet was a reprint from Investigative  Leads, a newsletter produced in the same offices as the National Anti-Drug  Coalition's War on Drugs magazine.
The editor of Investigative Leads at the time,  Michelle Steinberg, doubled as an editor of War on Drugs.
One of CABA's first public activities was an October 1980 press conference in  New Orleans, a city where the LaRouchians had never been active before.
The  event can be seen as a gesture of support for Marcello, the most important local  Brilab defendant.
NCLC member Tim Richardson told reporters that CABA  already had raised $35,000, mostly from national labor unions.
He declined to  say if any of the New Orleans defendants had accepted the group's offers of aid,  but apparently they had, because a second New Orleans press conference was  staged in March 1981.
Richardson was again the spokesman, and called on  President Reagan to end Brilab.
He also called the Justice Department's principal  witness a "pathological liar."
The following August a federal jury found Marcello  guilty of conspiring to bribe a public official to gain millions of dollars in state  insurance contracts.
He was sentenced to seven years in prison.
New Solidarity  complained that he had been "entrapped."
Marcello's co-defendants included his longtime friend I. Irving Davidson, who was  acquitted on all counts.
Davidson, a self-described Washington "door opener and  arranger," had been in touch with the LaRouchians since the mid-1970s and was  regarded by them as a key contact.
But he recalls being surprised when they  showed up in New Orleans.
"I never introduced them to people there," he  asserted, adding that neither he nor Marcello became involved with the Brilab  committee, which he said was financed by "a certain branch of the Teamsters."
Davidson said his own frequent meetings with the LaRouchians were merely to  pick their brains and purchase intelligence reports.
He admitted that Mitch  WerBell had occasionally been present at these meetings, but only in a security  capacity.
Although Davidson denied ever introducing the LaRouchians to anyone big, he  was a useful contact simply to chat with.
He knew the Teamsters well, having  been Jimmy Hoffa's public relations man.
In 1959, he joined with Hoffa and Bill  Presser to sell arms to Fulgencio Batista on behalf of the CIA.
In the 1960  presidential election, he served as Hoffa's emissary to top aides of Richard Nixon  and Democratic vice presidential candidate Lyndon Johnson.
He later received a  $13.5 million real estate loan from the Central States Pension Fund.
The LaRouchians also offered their services to Brilab defendants in Houston.
An  indicted Operating Engineers Union official accepted, and his attorney told the  Houston Post that information gathered by CABA against a prosecution witness  would be used in the defense.
Other defendants turned them down.
A  spokesman for the Harris County (Houston) AFL-CIO denounced CABA as the  tool of "cheap muscle people."
By the summer of 1981, CABA's Houston phone  number was disconnected and the group henceforth was run solely out of Detroit,  where its phone number was listed under the name and address of one Larry  Sherman, an NCLC leader who had just moved from Boston.
Sherman was a  strange choice to lead a campaign against alleged government frame-ups and  vendettas.
Four years earlier, the Boston media had exposed how he tried to  frame members of the Clamshell Alliance, an antinuclear group, by feeding the  New Hampshire State Police reports of nonexistent terrorist plots.
The Detroit NCLC began publishing the American Labor Beacon, a pro-CABA  newsletter.
Edited by Sherman, the first issue was mailed free to Teamster and  AFL-CIO locals throughout the country.
Union leaders were then called and  asked to subscribe.
The Beacon asked its readers to donate to CABA.
It said that  although direct contributions to CABA could not lawfully be made from union  funds, such funds could be applied lo the purchase of "educational materials."
Potential contributors were assured that CABA was "not obligated to report  donors" to the government.
The Beacon featured a "Rat of the Month" column targeting prosecutors such as  Thomas Puccio of the Brooklyn Organized Crime Strike Force and various  witnesses from the Federal Witness Protection Program (collectively referred to     as "slime from the gutter").
The newsletter also announced a "Rat of the Decade"  award for Walter Sheridan, former chief investigator for the McClellan  Committee.
Quoting Jimmy Hoffa, the Beacon called Sheridan a "slimy, sleazy  rat."
CABA and the Beacon were closely linked to Renaissance Printing, the Detroit  firm incorporated by the NCLC's local leader, Kenneth Dalto, and two associates.
For several years Renaissance had done printing work for the NCLC and the  Michigan Anti-Drug Coalition, as well as the Teamsters and other outside clients.
Gradually, the Detroit LaRouche network had been drawn into the activities of  Rolland McMaster, developing what New Solidarity would later allege were an  "array of mafioso connections."
The various McMaster-Dalto-NCLC forays into  Teamster politics were the surface manifestation of this alliance.
The president of  Renaissance, Scott Elliot, had been the treasurer of the "Teamster" Committee to  elect LaRouche President, which circulated McMaster's 1979 endorsement of  LaRouche.
Elliot later worked with Larry McHenry, a McMaster sidekick, on a  scheme to get TDU leader Pete Camarata expelled from Local 299 for allegedly  violating its bylaws; they succeeded in getting him placed on probation.
The two  also appeared on local television to attack the TDU.
In 1980, Renaissance obtained a major infusion of capital that LaRouche later  alleged came from organized crime.
Elliot and his associates then launched a  national financial printing operation under the name Computype, with  headquarters at Renaissance.
They opened branches in seven cities, leased  state-of-the-art equipment for facsimile transmission, and began soliciting  business from energy companies in the South and Southwest.
Like other  financial printers, much of their work included circulating confidential drafts of  tender offers and stock prospectuses to principals involved in the transactions.
As of 1981, Renaissance claimed 150 accounts, but its growth proved to be a  disaster for LaRouche.
It gave Dalto and his associates a large degree of  independence from the NCLC national office.
They began to chafe under political  directives from New York that seemed always to clash with their new interest in  getting rich.
They bought new cars and affected the flowery shirts popular among  Teamster officials.
They studied books on franchising.
Elliot even asked his  attorneys for a crash course in offshore banking.
LaRouche became suspicious in the summer of 1981.
He had cracked down on  Computron six months previously for placing profits before politics, and he now  had some probing questions to put to Dalto and Elliot.
The Detroit LaRouchian  leaders could see the handwriting on the wall.
They decided to break away from  the NCLC before LaRouche could drive a wedge between them and the Detroit  rank and file.
It is not known if McMaster provided them with advice based on his  vast experience in the Byzantine world of Teamster politics.
But so well did the  Detroit faction plan its revolt that LaRouche and his vaunted Security staff were  taken totally by surprise.
In late October, LaRouche received a letter signed by     almost the entire membership of the Detroit organization and by Computype  employees in Chicago, Atlanta, Houston, and Boston--a total of 1 17 NCLC  members-announcing their resignation from the NCLC and "all other LaRouche-  affiliated organizations."
LaRouche responded with a flurry of internal memos intended to whip up his  loyalists for a counterpunch against the Detroit "country and western" faction, so  named because of their alleged fondness for popular instead of classical music.
He claimed that Jewish financiers and mobsters, including, above all, the Detroit  financier Max Fisher, had instigated the split.
Using the vampire imagery so  beloved by anti-Semites everywhere, LaRouche depicted the "Fisher-centered  banking apparatus" as sinking its "dope-soaked teeth" into the Dalto group.
Also  blamed was the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith: "We know how the ADL  officials and others have been playing the game....We now know exactly how to  proceed to crush this murderous filth."
LaRouche's memos that fall included amazingly indiscreet revelations about the  1980 New Hampshire campaign and the alleged mob role at Computype.
LaRouche mentioned the hiring of Ferris in New Hampshire, the scheme to  influence voters through a policy of "have a hundred-dollar bill," the pressure on  the NCLC of "'advisers' in Southfield, Michigan," and alleged contacts with "'wise  guys' assets" in Atlanta.
He also discussed how the NCLC had deliberately  developed a "'Mafia Connections' self-image" during the 1980 campaign and had  used threats of Mafia violence to keep the membership in line.
LaRouche said  this policy had been a mistake, but he blamed it all on Dalto and Gus Kalimtgis.
(NCLC defectors say it really was LaRouche's idea.)
LaRouche was a bit nervous  about the long-range consequences: "Under no circumstances discuss.
.
.
the use  of the 'Mafia Violence' aura outside of the ranks of the membership...," he  instructed NCLC members.
"If you were to discuss this publicly, we would  prematurely trigger [the] possibility of legal action."
However, LaRouche and his followers continued to use the very rhetoric he was  criticizing.
An NCLC memo boasted of a scheme to make trouble for Dalto with  the Mafia.
"It has been learned," the memo said, "that.
.
.
Dalto was keeping a  double set of [Computype] books to rip off a business contact in Chicago."
The  latter was described as a "so-called Mafia boss" and Dalto's "partner."
LaRouche  himself said: "Let the 'Mafia' rub out Ken....Naturally, we shall not be reticent in  mentioning to certain circles certain facts now documented in our possession.
Let  the creep sweat.
Let him run.
Let him choose his hiding place."
Associates of Dalto say the double set of books was a LaRouche fabrication,  although they worried at the time that LaRouche might have concocted false  evidence.
No physical harm came to Dalto either from mobsters or from the  LaRouchians.
Yet there can be no doubt of the ferocity of LaRouche's fantasies  as reflected in various jokes included in the NCLC daily briefings.
In one joke  Dalto ends up committing suicide.
In another the "Chicago Mafia" plants a bomb     under his "Lincoln Continental."
In a third he arrives at the gates of Hell "wearing  a new, custom-fitted pair of cement overshoes."
LaRouche also warned his loyalists that they'd better stay loyal: "Anyone who  opposes my orders will, in the moral sense, be shot on the spot for  insubordination.... I am the 'boss.'"
The statement confirmed the observation by  NCLC defector Dave Phillips, in a document earlier that year, that LaRouche,  with his emphasis on personal "fealty" and "'ecumenical'.
.
.
Sun Belt ventures,"  had transformed the NCLC into a comic-opera version of a "Sicilian family  business."
The Dalto faction's enterprises flourished after the split.
Renaissance expanded  to almost a hundred employees and attracted Drexel-Burnham and other Wall  Street investment firms as clients.
It also continued to print Teamster smear  literature, although no longer a unionized shop.
Dalto and his partners bought out  "Frank Edwards" (the Chicago investor), but their unofficial deprogrammer,  McMaster, remained as a behind-the-scenes influence.
Renaissance executives  went on vacations with him, and the firm eventually moved into a building he had  purchased, where he kept his eye on the accounts.
But there were also  problems.
Elliot and two other former LaRouchians sued Dalto for control.
Two  satellite offices had to be closed.
Finally, in 1985 Renaissance entered Chapter  1 1 bankruptcy and had to lay off a majority of its staff.
The Dalto faction found it difficult to break with the old compulsive deceptiveness,  which was as much a habit of their hoodlum friends as of the NCLC.
When the  Beacon editors received a letter from a building trades official asking them to  "clarify" their relationship to LaRouche, their answer, published in the first  Beacon issue after the split, blithely ignored their ten-year history of participation  in the NCLC.
"The Beacon has been dedicated to defending labor from its  enemies within and without," they wrote.
"After investigating [!]
the LaRouche  organization for a period of time [!]
, we have come to the conclusion that he and  his organization fall into the category of 'enemies without.'"
Soon thereafter close cronies of Dalto began to feed investigative reporters  tidbits about LaRouche, but avoided any revelations about their own faction's  past.
Although they claimed they were through with extremist politics and only  wanted to operate their commercial enterprises in peace, they continued to run  smear campaigns against union reformers.
These activities were conducted  through a variety of pre-split and post-split fronts: the Beacon News Service,  Inform America, Environmental News Service, the Parity Foundation, Union  Communications, and Intellico (the latter a self-styled private intelligence  organization).
In 1982 Larry Sherman prepared an Intellico report for United Mine Workers  Union president Sam Church regarding the latter's opponent in the upcoming  union election, Richard Trumka.
Purportedly based on a trip through the coal     district and interviews witli people in and around Trumka's campaign, tine report  included unsubstantiated allegations that he was linked to Communists.
The  report helped Church gain support from gullible outsiders, including the Moral  Majority and Penthouse publisher Bob Guccione.
A major role in soliciting this  outside support was played by Michael Doud Gill, a member of the Republican  National Committee and a prominent Washington power broker.
Meanwhile,  Senator Orrin Hatch announced an investigation of charges (apparently  Intellico's) of alleged subversive influences in the UMW and other unions.
All this  had no impact on the union rank and file, which gave Trumka a resounding  victory.
The Dalto group became involved in Detroit Teamster elections in 1983, when  international vice president Robert Holmes, a former rival of Rolland McMaster,  faced a stiff election challenge from the TDU for control of his power base.
Local  337.
Holmes hired Richard Leebove, a Dalto/McMaster crony and former NCLC  member, as a thousand-dollar-a-week "communications" aide.
Leebove's  specialty had always been the heavy-handed smear.
In the late 1970s he had  traveled around the Midwest delivering tirades against the TDU at meetings of  Teamster locals.
He had also displayed his talents as the spokesman for Citizens  for Chicago, a LaRouchian front group that circulated scurrilous leaflets against  Chicago mayor Jane Byrne in 1979-80 (the leaflets accused her of being  controlled by the mob and of being married to a gigolo).
Leebove's role in the 1983 Teamster elections showed that the Dalto faction was  still practicing LaRouchism without LaRouche, Smear articles appeared in the  Local 337 News repeating previous NCLC charges against the TDU~for  instance, that the Rockefeller family was funding it.
One article implied falsely  that Senator Hatch intended to launch an investigation of the TDU for subversive  activity.
Indirect attacks were leveled against the local's secretary-treasurer, TDU  member Jerry Bliss, who was denied equal space to respond.
Forged handbills  appeared in Local 337 shops purporting to be from the TDU but containing  material intended to embarrass the TDU candidates.
The hiring of Leebove underscored the opportunism that was always at the root  of the Teamster/NCLC connection.
In 1979, Holmes, as head of the Teamster  joint council in Detroit, had supported the resolution condemning McMaster's so-  called Teamster Committee to Elect LaRouche President, in which Leebove had  been active.
Now, in a situation in which Leebove's usefulness appeared to  outweigh any potential embarrassment.
Holmes was willing to deal,   CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
Chapter Thirty-eight   Senators, Cabinet Members and Dictators   LaRouche's message that racketeering is twentietli-century Americanism was  useful to strol<e tine egos of Teamster officials.
To Mafia dons, it might have been  interpreted as a signal that LaRouche wanted a niche in organized crime.
But it  was hardly the stuff of which effective publicity campaigns are made.
For that, he  needed something less obvious — an issue that could give a veneer of legitimacy  to his "hands off the mob" propaganda.
He found this issue in Abscam's civil liberties implications.
FBI undercover agents  had solicited bribes from congressmen who, unlike the Brilab defendants, had  not previously engaged in a pattern of illegal activities.
Targets such as Senator  Harrison Williams (D.-N.J.) were widely perceived as victims of prosecutorial  tactics outside the legitimate mandate of law enforcement.
Williams had a  distinguished legislative record and staunchly maintained his innocence.
Although a jury found him guilty in May 1 981 on nine counts of bribery and  conspiracy, he had the potential to gain public sympathy — something a Carlos  Marcello or Frank Sheeran could never hope to achieve.
In the fall of 1 981 , when Williams' case was on appeal and he was facing  expulsion from the Senate, the LaRouchians adopted him as their latest victim of  political persecution by evil FBI agents.
Lacking support from his fellow senators,  Williams was ready to grasp at straws.
When LaRouche's National Democratic  Policy Committee launched a petition campaign among trade unionists to stop  the Senate expulsion proceeding, Williams consented to be interviewed for a  half-hour NDPC-produced videotape that was later shown at gatherings of labor  officials and politicians in New Jersey.
The NDPC also sponsored a fundraising  event for Williams at New York's Statler Hilton.
A Williams aide commented to the  Passaic Herald-News that the NDPC had "a rather broader following than is  generally thought," especially among "auto dealers and construction people."
As  the expulsion vote approached.
New Solidarity claimed that the NDPC was  rallying the Laborers, Teamsters, and other unions to defend Williams.
NDPC  speakers had been sent, the paper said, to Democratic clubs and union locals  around New Jersey to "explain the broader threat to the Constitution and to labor  and constituency organizations..."   In February 1982 the NDPC joined with officials from the Teamsters and the  construction trades to found the National Labor Committee to Defend Harrison  Williams.
The LaRouchians promised to launch an "immediate lobbying  mobilization across the country to press for a full investigation of Abscam  illegalities."
The founding meeting was held in Atlantic City, The committee's     statement of policy suggested that the defense of Williams was really a cover for  defending FBI-targeted labor racketeers: "We.
.
.
regard the case of Sen. Harrison  Williams.
.
.
as being a turning point for the labor movement.
We either rise to his  defense in a unified fashion, across the nation, from the bottom to the top of  labor, or we ourselves should not be surprised to hear the knock at the door  saying we're next."
Support for this statement came mostly from local New  Jersey union officials.
The AFL-CIO leadership refused to have anything to do  with it.
New Solidarity then accused AFL-CIO chief Lane Kirkland of being pro-  Abscam.
In fact, Kirkland spoke out strongly against the sting operations, as did  many civil libertarians and trade unionists totally unconnected to LaRouche's  committee.
The high point of the NDPC's campaign to defend Williams was a Washington  rally at which a message, supposedly from the senator, was read out: "I think that  the entire American people will one day thank and commend Lyn and Helga  LaRouche...for bringing to light the facts of police state methods, and organizing  the resistance to them.
...Our tradition is not to give in to Gestapo methods but to  fight them."
Another beneficiary of the LaRouche organization's crusade against FBI  entrapment tactics was auto tycoon John DeLorean, who was indicted in 1982 on  charges of cocaine trafficking.
According to Gordon Novel, who worked as a  private investigator for the defense, LaRouche aide Jeffrey Steinberg provided  research materials on how the British government allegedly was out to get  DeLorean.
Former NCLC security staffer Charles Tate recalls: "I wrote a big  paper on Jeff's instructions.
I was told I'd get to meet with the DeLoreans but that  fell through."
Former NCLC security consultants Roy Frankhouser and Lee Fick  also say they were assigned to this project.
DeLorean, who was acquitted by a  jury in 1984, has said that he received information from the LaRouchians but  never paid them any money.
The LaRouchians also attempted to help out beleaguered Labor Secretary  Raymond Donovan when a federal special prosecutor investigated allegations  that his firm, Schiavone Construction Company in Secaucus, New Jersey, had  paid bribes to labor racketeers and that Donovan was himself an associate of  organized crime.
According to LaRouche defectors, a Teamster-linked attorney  asked the NCLC's Security staff to gather information on behalf of Donovan and  Schiavone.
LaRouche's Security chief, Jeffrey Steinberg, personally handled the  investigation, A June 18, 1982, Investigative Leads memo from Steinberg to  Morris Levin, Schiavone's house counsel, outlined the progress of Steinberg's  work and mentioned plans for a meeting with Robert Shortley, a private  investigator also working on behalf of Schiavone.
Levin recalled this memo in a  1984 phone interview and said he had talked to Steinberg "from time to time."
He  also said the firm's president, Ronald Schiavone, had met with Steinberg.
Copies of the Steinberg memo and otiier private investigative documents were  obtained by a University of Oklalioma graduate student, Frank Smist, from  Robert J. Flynn, a Wasliington attorney wlio liad been liired by Scliiavone to find  out wlio was spreading tine allegations about Donovan.
In 1984 Smist turned the  documents over to the Brooklyn Organized Crime Strike Force.
This set off an  investigation of whether unauthorized disclosures from government sources  (suggested by the documents' contents) might have triggered the murder of Fred  Furino, a former official of Tony Pro's Local 560.
Furino, whose body was found  in a car trunk in mid-June 1982, had been a prospective federal witness  regarding alleged Schiavone payoffs to the mob.
He had appeared before the  grand jury several months previously.
The Steinberg memo, written several days after Furino's disappearance,  mentioned that the Teamster official had been a topic of conversation between  an NCLC staff member and an NBC television reporter.
The NCLC member  pumped the reporter to find out if he knew anything about the contents of the not  yet released special prosecutor's report.
Steinberg claimed his associate learned  from the reporter that the special prosecutor's office had given Furino a  polygraph test.
In 1984 Ronald Schiavone told The New York Times that he had hired private  investigator Shortley to find out who on the Senate Labor Committee staff was  spreading allegations about himself and Donovan.
NCLC defectors say that  Steinberg and other members of Security did research on similar lines.
In fact.
Executive Intelligence Review published at least two articles in 1981 by a  Steinberg assistant purporting to describe a conspiracy by Senate Labor  Committee staffers to embarrass the Reagan administration by bringing down  Donovan.
Although the special prosecutor's report concluded that there was "insufficient  credible evidence" to indict Donovan, an investigation subsequently launched by  the Bronx district attorney's office resulted in the September 1984 indictment of  Donovan and seven others, including Levin, Schiavone, and Genovese crime  family member William {"the Butcher") Masselli.
The defendants were charged  with 137 counts of larceny and fraud in relation to contracts on a New York City  subway tunnel.
It was the first time in American history that a sitting cabinet  member had been indicted on criminal charges.
Donovan resigned after taking a  leave of absence.
New Solidarity said it was all part of a plot by the KGB, Henry  Kissinger, and the AFL-CIO to take over the Labor Department.
(As matters  turned out, Donovan and his co-defendants were all found innocent in 1987 after  an eight-month trial.)
LaRouche's allies in Teamster Local 282 on Long Island were also feeling the  heat.
Business agent Harold Gross, McMaster's old associate, was indicted in  1981 on charges that included extorting a no-show job from Schiavone  Construction for his chauffeur.
Local 282 president John Cody was indicted for     racketeering in January 1982.
Tliat spring tine New York Times publislied a  series on corruption in tine local construction unions.
A major problem, the series  charged, was Cody's conduct as head of Local 282, representing 4,000 building  supply truckers.
Rushing to Cody's defense came LaRouche follower Mel  Klenetsky, a candidate in the Democratic primary against U.S. Senator Daniel  Patrick Moynihan.
Klenetsky issued an appeal to the labor movement to unite  behind Cody.
He also printed up copies of a letter from a prominent builder taking  issue with the Times's criticisms of Local 282.
Cody's name subsequently  appeared along with those of several Laborers Union officials in an  advertisement in New York City's Amsterdam News endorsing Klenetsky.
In  October 1982 Cody was convicted of seven counts of racketeering and income-  tax evasion.
One contractor testified he had handed Cody $100,000 in a  shoebox.
The guilty verdict was obtained in spite of the disappearance of several  witnesses, including Carpenters Union chief Ted Maritas (federal investigators  believe Maritas was murdered).
When Cody was sentenced to five years in  prison.
New Solidarity said this was more proof of selective prosecution.
The  case was simply a "frame-up engineered by The New York Times and its  organized crime gestapo," allegedly to punish Cody for supporting LaRouche.
"The word is that the Times wants to see John Cody dead, because he dared to  oppose their friends," said the LaRouche paper.
A subsequent article by  Klenetsky said the Cody case demonstrated the need for a "national citizens'  mobilization to strip the FBI of its funds until its lawlessness is checked."
The  LaRouchian arguments regarding the Cody case were quite similar to those  LaRouche himself would use in his 1988 trial for obstruction of justice.
The LaRouchian relationship to the national Teamster leadership had its ups and  downs in the early 1980s.
Roy Williams became IBT president in 1981 after  Fitzsimmons' death.
Jackie Presser moved up to number two, and was widely  expected to soon replace Williams, who was indicted for bribery shortly after  assuming office.
To demonstrate his capacity for aggressive leadership, Presser  decided to go after the TDU and isolate it as thoroughly as possible prior to the  1981 national convention in Las Vegas.
A wave of bogus TDU fliers and other  forgeries began to circulate in the union.
The TDU's newspaper charged that the  NCLC was producing them.
The nastiest was a letter purporting to be from the  National Right to Work Committee, an anti-labor lobbying group, to TDU leader  Pete Camarata.
"Pete, you are going to have the NRWC's total.
.
.
support in your  upcoming effort to disrupt the Teamsters' Convention," the letter said.
Copies  were mailed to Teamster locals in plain envelopes with no return address.
The  TDU promptly denied any connection between Camarata and the NRWC, and  pointed out the preposterous references in the letter to such LaRouchian  bugbears as the Mont Pelerin Society and the Heritage Foundation.
However,  many Teamster officials used it, just as they had used The Plot to Destroy the  Teamsters in 1977-78.
Reports began to pour into the TDU national office from  rank-and-file Teamsters who had received copies of the letter.
The president of  an Alabama local mailed it to members at union expense.
Teamster local officers  in St. Louis, Toledo, San Antonio, and other cities also distributed the pamphlet.
"It is clear," the TDU's Convoy said, "that a national distribution of the Big Lie is  underway."
Meanwhile, Presser set up two paper organizations, TRUTH (Teamster Ranks  United to Help) and BLAST (Brotherhood of Loyal Americans and Strong  Teamsters), spreading standard LaRouche smears about "Commie-Rat-A"  (Camarata) and "Ayatollah Mel" (TDU trustee Mel Packer).
Goons claiming to be  from TRUTH and BLAST created an atmosphere of intimidation at the  convention, roughing up Camarata while LaRouche intelligence operatives  roamed the floor with guest passes from Midwest locals.
The LaRouchians struck out, however, with Roy Williams.
They denounced his  indictment with the usual litany about witch-hunts, frame-ups, squealers, and  Gestapos, but Williams, the creature of Kansas City crime lord Nick Civella,  showed little interest.
This coolness and Rolland McMaster's continued  friendliness with the Detroit defectors apparently were the reasons for a 1982  editorial in New Solidarity entitled "Teamster Stupidity."
For once, the  LaRouchians revealed their true feelings about their blue-collar allies.
The  Justice Department, the editorial argued, could be "easily defeated" if the IBT  would organize its nearly two million members for a political counterattack based  on LaRouche's ideology.
"Unfortunately for this nation," the editorial complained,  "the leadership of the Teamsters has thus far proven itself to be of two types  when it comes to acting upon this reality: corrupt or stupid."
Yet when Williams  was convicted of bribery, the LaRouchians attempted to commiserate with him.
The decision was, they said, "nothing less than Nazi justice."
When Presser ascended to the Teamster presidency, the LaRouchians finally  seemed on the brink of becoming the brain trust of labor's hoodlum wing, in spite  of their setback in Detroit.
Presser continued the aggressive posture against the  TDU that had given the LaRouchians their initial entree to the union leadership.
When a TDU convention in Michigan was violently disrupted by thugs in October   1983, Presser stated at a Cleveland joint council meeting: "We should be doing  more of that.... I'm not going to let up on these people."
But in late 1983 and early   1 984, as the media began to probe for the first time the relationship between  LaRouche and the Reagan administration, Presser followed other Reagan allies  in distancing himself from the NCLC.
The LaRouchians suffered a shock when the Los Angeles Times revealed in mid-  1984 that Presser had been selectively providing information to the FBI since the  early 1970s.
It took no clairvoyance for them to realize that providing the FBI with  information on LaRouche, as well as on minor hoods like John Nardi, Jr., may  have been Presser's way of keeping the FBI off his back while he rose to the  Teamster presidency.
After all, the LaRouchians themselves had been feeding  information to the FBI almost as long as Presser had — on Communists, Yippies,  and arms merchants — in hopes the FBI would overlook their own improprieties.
(In 1987 the Justice Department officially acknowledged Presser's informant role     in motions pursuant to a racl<eteering prosecution of tine Teamster cliief.
Presser's attorney tlien confirmed tliat Presser liad liad "continuous contact" witli  tine FBI for more tlian a decade.)
LaRouclie aide Edward Spannaus filed a Freedom of Information Act request  with the FBI for documents in Presser's informant file "insofar as such documents  mention or discuss Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr. ...or associates of [his]."
When the  FBI turned down the request, Spannaus filed suit in federal court in Alexandria,  Virginia.
After a government motion for summary judgment was denied.
New  Solidarity gleefully announced that it hoped to "lift the veil on Presser's real rise  to power in the Teamsters."
By this time.
New Solidarity was no longer calling  Presser a heroic Teamster "nation builder," but simply an "accused embezzler."
If the NCLC's alliance with the highest levels of the IBT had turned a cropper,  LaRouche simply raised his sights higher — from hoodlums who control unions to  those who control nations.
After numerous trips to Central America, his  intelligence aides latched on to the plight of General Manuel Antonio Noriega.
The Panamanian strongman had begun to attract harsh criticism from the U.S.  government and media in 1985-86, primarily because of his role in the cocaine  traffic.
The LaRouchians began to vigorously defend him, just as they had done  with the Teamsters.
In early 1986, Senator Jesse Helms (R.-N.
C), a member of the Senate Foreign  Relations Committee, raised the issue of Noriega's links to Fidel Castro,  involvement in drug trafficking, and responsibility for the murder of Dr. Hugo  Spadafora, a former Panamanian Health Minister who had been critical of the  regime.
Helms stated flatly that Noriega was "head of the biggest drug trafficking  operation in the Western Hemisphere."
These charges were not right-wing paranoia.
DEA, CIA, Pentagon, and State  Department reports dating back to the early 1970s had documented Noriega's  involvement in drug trafficking.
A 1985 House Foreign Affairs Committee report  characterized Panama under Noriega's rule as a "drug and chemical  transshipment point and money-laundering center for drug money."
In a 1 986  New York Times article, James LeMoyne compared Noriega's army to the Mafia,  because it "skims funds, takes kickbacks, engages in smuggling and has a  political structure resembling a racketeering network in which loyal henchmen  share in the spoils."
An equally good analogy would have been the Teamsters  union.
Indeed, the parallels between the leadership style of Noriega and the most  corrupt Teamster bosses are uncanny.
Just as Jimmy Hoffa indulged in the  rhetoric of class struggle at union meetings, so Noriega affected a militant  populist and anti-imperialist rhetoric to manipulate Panamanian workers.
Just as  Jackie Presser became an FBI informer in the early 1970s to divert federal  authorities from his own misdeeds, so Noriega became a source for the U.S.  intelligence community at that time to facilitate his long-range ambitions.
Just as  Presser had his TRUTH and BLAST — and Tony Pro his team of enforcers —     Noriega had his death squads.
Just as Rolland IVIclVI aster issued denunciations  of the evils of drug trafficking for the IVIichigan Anti-Drug Coalition, so Noriega  went to an international anti-drug conference in Vienna, where he described  drugs as the "scourge" of mankind.
Just as Presser and the Teamsters were  willing to deal with the extremist LaRouchians, so Noriega developed ties with M-  19, the pro-Castro guerrilla group in Colombia, and with Castro's secret service,  the DGI.
Just as certain Teamster leaders were rumored to have encouraged the  murder of Hoffa, so Noriega was believed to have bumped off his predecessor,  General Omar Torrijos Herrera.
In the mid-1980s, NCLC operative Carlos Wesley made several trips to Panama,  where the organization already had a number of contacts (for instance, a top  official of the national construction workers union had lent his name to  LaRouche's Schiller Institute).
After meeting with a pro-Noriega group of  businessmen, Wesley announced that these individuals represented "patriotic  and nationalist tendencies" and were in substantial agreement with the economic  development/anti-IMF program of the Schiller Institute.
Soon the LaRouchians  had become Noriega's public relations flacks in Washington.
As students of Mitch  WerBell's classic defense in the 1 976 pot-smuggling trial, they knew just how to  defend the indefensible.
They circulated a white paper on Capitol Hill and other  documents that accused Senator Helms of being the "point man" in a State  Department conspiracy to overthrow Noriega because of the latter's opposition \o  drugs.
Noriega, they said, was being set up by the real "drug Mafia," which had  learned he was planning a "military War on Drugs."
This drug Mafia was in  league with narco-terrorists, and thus wanted not only to stop Noriega from  cracking down on drugs but also to destabilize Panama so the Soviets could gain  control of the Canal.
Just why the State Department and Helms should want this  was explainable only in terms of LaRouche's theory of secret oligarchical control  of the Western world.
Not a very convincing scenario to anyone in Washington,  but that wasn't the point: The LaRouchians knew that a cover story based on  absurd premises, as long as it is internally consistent, can be useful as a smoke  screen and a delaying tactic.
The Panamanian embassy in Washington had nothing more convincing to offer  the media, especially after Noriega forced figurehead President Nicolas Ardito  Barletta to resign at gunpoint for urging an independent investigation of the  Spadafora slaying.
The embassy suggested that journalists call the  LaRouchians, who said that Barletta's resignation was a cause for rejoicing.
Was  he not a wretched agent of Henry Kissinger and those "who lend their souls to  the institutions of usury"?
LaRouche followers demonstrated outside the Senate  hearings on Panama, with signs suggesting that Helms was in the pay of Israel's  Mossad.
Executive Intelligence Review reprinted a speech by Noriega discussing  the "transcendental role" of the military in Central America.
When the United  States suspended aid to Panama in July 1987, the LaRouchians compared the  regime's plight to their own problems with federal prosecutors.
Most grotesque was New Solidarity's attitude toward tine Spadafora murder.
Tine  former government liealtli official had been tortured for several hours and then  decapitated.
His head had been placed in a U.S. postal bag and dumped over  the border in Costa Rica.
New Solidarity treated this as a case of good riddance  to bad rubbish, claiming that Spadafora had been a left-wing narco-terrorist  plotting to launch a Sandinista-style movement in Panama.
These charges, made  in the context of ridiculing the Spadafora family's grief, were totally untrue.
Spadafora was an opponent of the Cuban-backed Sandinista regime, had served  with Eden Pastora's Contra forces, and had supported the Miskito Indian  resistance movement.
He had been an informant for U.S. intelligence agencies  on vital matters of national security.
Only days before his murder he had met with  a DEA official to supply details about Noriega's trafficking.
The relationship between LaRouche and Noriega was touched on in February 9,  1988, testimony before the U.S. Senate Foreign Relations Committee's  Subcommittee on Terrorism, Narcotics, and International Operations.
Jose I.  Blandon Castillo, Panama's former New York consul general, stated that "Mr  LaRouche works for Mr. Noriega" and that LaRouche's followers had given  Noriega intelligence reports on several U.S. senators.
"When [the senators]  arrived in Panama, we had the information and published it in the papers before  they arrived."
Blandon added that the LaRouchian propaganda cover story on the  death of Spadafora (that he was a left-wing terrorist) was the "official version" of  Noriega's G-2 (military intelligence).
Blandon also revealed that Mario Parnther, a  Panamanian politician close to Noriega, was one of the links to LaRouche.
Parnther "came to the States to speak in favor of Lyndon LaRouche.
.
.
he spoke to  me of LaRouche's role in connection with Panama, and said that he, Parnther,  met with LaRouche in Boston."
The LaRouchians had not kept Parnther's trip a secret.
EIR had reported on it in  September 1987, noting that he addressed the Commission to Investigate  Human Rights Violations in the United States, an organization set up to protest  the federal prosecutions of LaRouche and his followers.
Identifying Parnther as a  member of the national directorate of Noriega's party, EIR had quoted him as  praising LaRouche's "unyielding commitment to the truth about Panama" and  asserting: "We are fortunate that men emerge such as Lyndon LaRouche...."   In reporting on Blandon 's testimony, EIR implied that LaRouche had advised  Noriega, via Parnther, to reject the State Department's plan that the dictator  resign in exchange for immunity.
EIR suggested that LaRouche had helped to  influence Noriega's decision to adopt a hard line against the United States (a line  that sent U.S. policy in Central America into a tailspin).
Whether or not  LaRouche's role was really so crucial, he had apparently indeed suggested that  Noriega emulate what he himself was doing in the Boston case: Delay and hang  tight until the enemy gets exhausted; in the meantime, create as much  ideological obfuscation as possible and threaten to expose everybody in  Washington who has ever secretly dealt with you.
In early 1988 the Panamanian     government produced a 300-page report that backed up the LaRouchian claim  that Noriega was Latin America's premier anti-drug warrior.
It was a pathetic  record of arrests of mules, spraying of marijuana plantations, and seizures of  cocaine from small dealers who hadn't made the proper payoffs.
Most of the  arrests described were a result either of DEA arm-twisting or else of Noriega  enforcing the Medellin cartel's control of the action.
But the report showed that  Noriega, like his apparent adviser LaRouche, had a certain embarrassment  potential: Included was the text of a 1 984 letter from DEA chief Francis Mullen,  Jr., to Noriega, hailing the dictator's "long-standing" and "very meaningful"  support for the DEA and thanking him for "the autographed photograph."
Wrote  Mullen: "I have had it framed and it is proudly displayed in my office."
In establishing ties with persons like Noriega and Jackie Presser, LaRouche was  not just being a crime groupie.
He was developing meanwhile his own operation  on the grand scale — an effort that eventually raked in over $200 million, much of  it via credit-card and loan fraud, while spinning off numerous secondary scams  involving federal matching funds, nonprofit foundations, and election campaign  committees.
Many LaRouchians who participated in these operations developed  a predatory frame of mind not just through LaRouche's psychological  manipulation but also by associating with convicted felons such as Michele  Sindona and Rolland McMaster and idolizing the likes of Tony Provenzano.
This  outlook, coupled with the NCLC's eleven-year history of shifting alliances with  various underworld figures, suggest that LaRouche is neither just a political  extremist nor simply a white-collar criminal in the Bernie Cornfeld mold.
Rather,  he is the "boss" (as he puts it) of an organization with striking resemblances to a  traditional racketeering enterprise.
In this aspect of his work, LaRouche has revealed the same genius for innovation  as in his political organizing.
He constructed his businesses on the basis of  cultism and ideology rather than ethnic ties and blood oaths.
He maximized  profits by persuading his followers to devote every waking hour to the  organization — and without even having to give them a cut of the action.
He  operated within the constitutionally protected framework of electoral activity (the  first such entrepreneur to do so).
He utilized an unincorporated political  association that is everywhere and yet nowhere, permeating a bewildering  network of corporate shells.
Most important, he developed a unique system for  warding off prosecutors — not a Maginot line of mob attorneys, but a multi-layered  defense in depth.
Studying the plight of the Teamsters union, LaRouche observed how intimately  prosecutorial initiatives are linked to investigative journalism and the media  spotlight.
He was able to break that link by aggressive libel suits and various  other forms of pressure on people with media influence, thus diverting the media  away from any serious pursuit of him for years.
Even though he lost every libel  battle, he won the war (at least for a few years) by making exposes of LaRouche  too expensive for the media chains.
But LaRouche took things a step further: When law enforcement agencies did  begin to investigate him, he immediately counterattacked with civil liberties suits  in federal court, charging a conspiracy to undermine his constitutional rights.
He  kept the FBI tied down for ten years with a suit, still pending in Manhattan, that  has cost the government heavily in pretrial litigation costs.
In the early 1980s he also used this technique to keep the Manhattan DA's office,  the Illinois state attorney general's office, and Federal Election Commission  investigators at bay.
When NCLC member Joyce Rubinstein was arrested in  1 985 on misdemeanor theft charges in Princeton, New Jersey, the LaRouchians  launched a federal suit against the arresting officers and the municipality.
(This  type of suit makes local police departments think twice about tangling with people  who can make more trouble than their arrest seems worth.)
LaRouche and his followers also developed a reputation as monumental extra-  courtroom nuisances.
Any prosecutor who went after them — or any politician who  took a public stand against them that might encourage prosecutors — could  expect to be picketed and to become the target of a smear campaign and/or  harassing phone calls.
In wielding the weapon of the Big Smear, LaRouche had  four advantages: the means of gathering intelligence and nasty gossip, the  means of distributing smear materials, freedom from fear of libel suits, and  freedom from having to worry about his own reputation.
His publishing entities  could crank out leaflets and brochures on a moment's notice, and his followers  could pass out hundreds of thousands of copies within days.
His publications  were meanwhile protected by the NCLC corporate shell game and thus were  virtually judgment-proof against libel suits (in fact they were rarely sued — most  targeted persons didn't know what else LaRouche might have on them).
Likewise, LaRouche didn't have to worry about upholding an image of  moderation.
He could play the mad-dog publisher with impunity, laying out the  smears no one else would touch (but occasionally seeing his material picked up  by the major media once he had done the spadework).
All this served as a  powerful incentive — just like his civil liberties suits — for prosecutors to go after  easier targets, as well as for politicians and media figures to leave him alone.
In  New York City in the early 1980s, as we have seen, this tactic protected him as  effectively as payoffs and rubouts protect Mafia dons.
Finally, LaRouche used his intelligence community gambit.
Although this was far  from being a new idea, his attempts to compromise the CIA included new twists.
LaRouche's system was not infallible, and by 1988 he and his followers were  embroiled in multiple indictments.
Yet for over a decade he had conducted his  questionable operations with virtual impunity, thanks to his creative tactics.
And  what ultimately was this defense-in-depth set up to protect?
The full scope of  LaRouche's financial activities is only beginning to be known.
Veteran LaRouche  watchers believe there are still huge gaps in the puzzle of where the money  came from to pay for his empire of political, intelligence-gathering, and     propaganda fronts in over a dozen countries.
As yet, neitlier law enforcement nor  investigative reporters liave probed liis operations in Colombia, Peru, Panama,  and Mexico, his close ties with military officers and members of the landowning  elite in Thailand, and his organization's alleged use of offshore bank accounts  and couriers to move cash around the world.
It is quite probable that the  intelligence agencies of more than one country would prefer that these matters  never be probed.
CLICK HERE FOR THE REFERENCE NOTES TO THIS CHAPTER.
AFTERWORD:   Why LaRouche Was Not Fought   Following the LaRouchian victories in the March 1986 Illinois primaries, some  observers argued that the Democratic Party's immune system had broken down.
In fact, the problem went far beyond the Democrats.
The major media had failed  over the years to vigorously unmask LaRouche.
Jewish and black organizations  and the left had largely ignored his dramatic political inroads in the early 1980s,  blithely allowing him to operate his international network of hate from midtown  Manhattan with nary a protest.
Reagan administration aides, GOP operatives.
Teamster leaders, and others on the right had treated him as just another  political ally, to be used as needed.
This see-no-evil attitude contrasted sharply with the opposition that both liberals  and conservatives displayed toward traditional hate groups such as the Ku Klux  Klan and Louis Farrakhan's Nation of Islam.
The double standard was revealed  most clearly in the 1984 presidential campaign.
When the Klan endorsed  President Reagan, it immediately received a blistering denunciation from him.
But when NBC exposed the administration's ties to LaRouche (while also  pointing out LaRouche's ties to the Klan), the White House response was that it  would continue to meet with whomever it pleased.
Not a single Jewish or black  organization condemned this response, nor did the media take issue with  Reagan.
Yet the connection between Jesse Jackson and Farrakhan meanwhile  became front-page news.
Reagan and Bush used the Farrakhan issue to hound  Walter Mondale, who was entirely innocent of any links to or sympathy with the  Chicago radio preacher.
Mondale and the Democratic Party, however, failed to  make an issue of the administration's dealings with LaRouche, whose statements  against the Jews over the years had been more extreme and much more  systematic than Farrakhan's.
Furthermore, the Democrats failed to take any  steps against LaRouche's massive infiltration of the party primaries that year.
Fundamentally, the political structure's immune system against the ultra-right is  geared only to oppose overt hate groups led by demagogues who speak their  minds frankly.
The LaRouchians, like a clever virus, evaded the immune system  by mixing rightwing and leftwing ideologies and by using code words and a  studied kookiness.
These tactics made it difficult for the public — and for harried  news reporters on deadline — to define LaRouchism.
And if one cannot define  some-thing, how can one fight it?
The NCLC's anti-Semitism did become widely  known, but it stirred up little visceral indignation because LaRouche often used  Jewish aides to express it.
(They would meet with reporters and Reagan     administration officials to tell them the NCLC was really only "anti-Zionist," that  LaRouche had been misinterpreted, and so on.)
Whenever such methods  stopped working, LaRouche fell back on his kook act, as if to suggest that even if  he were a fascist and a bigot he was a singularly harmless one not worth fighting.
This tactic turned out to be his strongest defense.
When he came under media  attack after the 1 986 Illinois primaries, he gave a rambling speech before the  National Press Club about assassination plots, and later announced on network  television a plan to colonize Mars.
The level of opposition to him dropped,  enabling his followers to make further grassroots electoral inroads and to  continue raising tens of millions of dollars a year.
The middle-class veneer of LaRouche's movement also helped to shield him  from serious criticism.
The Klan easily elicits opposition because its members are  perceived as ignorant "rednecks."
Farrakhan, of course, is widely regarded as a  gutter bigot, appealing mostly to low-income blacks.
But LaRouche speaks on TV  in a cultivated New England accent reminiscent of William F. Buckley's.
His  followers wear three-piece business suits and often sport degrees from major  universities.
Several are from prominent families.
Thus they often are treated not  as hate-mongers at all but as misguided idealists or as victims of cult  brainwashing.
Some media reports have implied that although a Klansman might  deserve harsh condemnation, the proper response to a LaRouchian — even one  convicted of felonies such as loan fraud — is to offer him psychotherapy and a  scholarship to get back into graduate school.
(In fact LaRouche's NCLC is no  more or less cultish than Farrakhan's Nation of Islam or the Klan-linked Aryan  Nation.
Indeed, the LaRouchians, with their higher education levels, would seem  to have even less excuse for anti-Semitism.)
The LaRouchians' ability to hide behind middle-class "educated" standards is  best illustrated by what happened when their Humanist Academy rented a hall at  Columbia University for a public gathering in 1980.
If they had worn bed sheets  and burned a cross, an uproar would have ensued.
Instead, they staged  Elizabethan dramatist Christopher Marlowe's The Jew of Malta, featuring a  Jewish villain who strangles a friar, poisons several nuns, betrays his Christian  neighbors to the Turks, and meets his end in a cauldron of boiling water.
The  audience, composed of NCLC members and friends, had been instructed that the  play was a weapon in the fight against the international "oligarchy."
They hissed  and laughed when Barabas the "rich Jew" appeared on the stage.
In essence,  this was no different from a cross burning, but a university spokesman defended  renting the hall to them.
He explained that the LaRouchians, unlike the Klan, fell  into a "gray area."
In spite of LaRouche's multileveled smoke screen, his movement would have  found fewer allies and more opponents except for the array of positive and  negative incentives he offered.
This was intelligent fascism in action.
Alone  among American ultraright bigots, LaRouche could offer potential allies  something of value: his prowess at intelligence gathering, his sophisticated dirty     tricks, and the sometimes formidable efforts of liis Fusion Energy  Foundation/Executive Intelligence Review think tank.
Furthermore, those who  accepted his help ran almost no risk of being publicly embarrassed: Since  LaRouche was not portrayed as especially sinister by the media, those who met  with him could always explain it away.
The LaRouchians were sensitive to the  needs of their allies in this respect.
If they had a relationship with a GOP  operative, they kept it secret.
If they ran a smear campaign against a particular  political candidate, they would also throw a few harmless punches against the  candidate who was being aided by their smears.
For instance, when LaRouche  spread rumors about George Bush and the Trilateral Commission during the  1980 New Hampshire primary, he also issued some pro forma criticisms of  Reagan.
On the negative side, LaRouche demonstrated that he could make life miserable  for powerful people if they crossed him.
His smear campaigns against Henry  Kissinger and Roy Cohn made this clear.
Such prominent figures had always  been beyond the reach of the traditional type of hate group, but LaRouche  carried the battle to their doorsteps.
As a result, other powerful people became  extremely reluctant to tangle with him.
This was not because they were all  cowards at heart.
Many of them would have denounced him if they had felt an  important matter of principle was at stake.
But the media's portrayal of LaRouche  as a kook--and the silence of most Jewish organizations about him in spite of the  massive quantity of anti-Semitic literature he was disseminating--sent a message  that it simply wasn't worth the effort to oppose him seriously.
But even on the infrequent occasions when vigorous opposition to LaRouche did  emerge, there was an astonishing ability on the part of many people to evade the  issue of principle.
When the Manhattan weekly Our Town published a series  attacking LaRouche in 1979, NCLC members went around to advertisers and to  stores that freely distributed the paper and threatened them with legal action.
Four major banks.
Consolidated Edison, and the New York Telephone Company  gave in immediately and either canceled advertising in Our Town or withdrew  permission for its circulation on their premises.
(Four years later, the telephone  company still banned Our Town.)
Such was the response of the business  community; what about the labor movement?
In 1980 a top official of the  Pennsylvania Federation of Teachers gave several donations to LaRouche's  presidential campaign.
When Jewish teachers urged the union's board to pass a  resolution criticizing the official, the board — reacting to factional problems in the  union — instead voted to commend h\rr\ and later censured a union leader who  had supported the original resolution.
In neither case were the people who caved in suffering under any great illusions  about LaRouche.
In the fall of 1979, his followers deluged the streets of New  York with leaflets calling for the crushing of the "Zionists."
In the PFT situation,  the protesting teachers provided abundant documentation of LaRouche's anti-  Semitism.
As the LaRouchians developed their deceptive tactics to higher levels     of sophistication, sucli incidents multiplied.
Each time, the evasion of the issue of  principle merely made similar evasions easier in the future.
And for some  politically astute people, the smoke screen became something they could hide  behind along with LaRouche while they conducted their business with him.
It  provided the basis for them to pretend \ha\ they didn't know what he was about  and pretend \ha\ they regarded him as a kook.
In fact the LaRouche movement's fascist character and its dangerous (non-kook)  side were not really difficult to see.
As early as 1976-77, recognition that  LaRouche had gone fascist could be found in places as diverse as the newsletter  of the Christian Anti-Communist Crusade and the Op-Ed page of The  Washington Post.
In 1980, Lionel Abel suggested in Dissent that LaRouche was  America's "first serious fascist," while the Anti-Defamation League's Michigan  spokesman, Richard Lobenthal, described the NCLC in 1981 as the "closest  thing to an American fascist party that we've got."
Several writers focused on the  neo-Nazi elements in LaRouche's ideology.
If this viewpoint — easily proven by LaRouche's writings, his alliances with ex-  Nazis and international neo-fascists, and a simple comparison of his tactics with  those of classical fascism — had been adopted and widely publicized by the major  media and other opinion makers, LaRouche would have been stopped dead in  his tracks in the early 1980s.
There would have been no chats with National  Security Council officials, no alliance with top Teamsters, no deals with shadowy  GOP operatives, no grassroots candidates' movement of significant proportions,  no passive sufferance by the Democratic Party, and certainly no Illinois primary  victories in 1 986.
All that was needed was for opinion leaders to draw the same  clear line they had drawn against the Klan, name LaRouche for what he really  was, and declare his movement beyond the bounds of decency.
The confusion on this point, and the inability to draw a clear line, is best  illustrated by the role of the major media and especially the major daily  newspapers.
The media were certainly not the only lax institution, but their  response both reflected and molded that of all other aspects of the political  immune system.
For instance, from the beginning of LaRouche's rise most major  newspapers shied away from analyzing his organization in any but the most  superficial terms.
They avoided the terms "fascist" and "neo-Nazi," which alone  could adequately express his aims and methods.
The New York Times in its  1979 series on LaRouche at least kept the concept, expressing it through  euphemisms and vivid examples, but soon even the euphemisms were dropped.
In the early 1980s, some newspapers began to describe LaRouche as a  "conservative Democrat" or to adopt other totally misleading labels.
The major media became silent about LaRouche's political actions as well as his  ideology.
The electoral breakthroughs of his followers were almost totally ignored  in the early 1980s.
No one in the media sought to find out where the two  thousand LaRouche candidates in 1984 had come from.
Major newspapers that     normally jump on any scandal involving the Teamsters union ignored the  LaRouche-Teamster connection even though it had been exhaustively  documented in Our Town, the Village Voice, Mother Jones, and Teamster  dissident publications.
Prior to 1986, the Baltimore Sun was the only major paper  to have probed LaRouche's finances, even though court cases involving  LaRouche corporate shells offered an easy score for any investigative reporter.
One reason for the laxness was the fear of libel suits.
In the late 1970s,  LaRouche and his followers sued the Anti-Defamation League and Our Town for  libel.
At the time, religious and psychological cults were filing numerous libel  suits, and many editors assumed LaRouche would be equally aggressive.
Although the ADL suit was dismissed and LaRouche quietly dropped the Our  Town suit (and filed no serious new libel suits until 1984), his followers  maintained his litigious reputation by calling up reporters and editors at the drop  of a hat to threaten legal action.
A Catch-22 resulted: Newspapers toned down  their coverage of LaRouche by using "soft" labels and avoiding mention of the  nastier aspects of his movement.
This soft approach then developed a life of its  own.
No longer was LaRouche perceived as the dangerous character portrayed  by The New York Times in 1979.
Hence there was no incentive for editors to call  his bluff.
LaRouche made what turned out to be one of his shrewdest moves in early 1 984.
He learned that he would be the subject of an expose on NBC's First Camera.
This threatened to undermine his ties with the Reagan administration and the  intelligence community.
But LaRouche must have known that First Camera had  relatively low national viewer ratings.
If other media could be prevented from  repeating the charges, the damage could possibly be contained.
Thus he sued  NBC for $150 million prior to the show.
The result was that some NBC affiliates  didn't air it and many newspapers didn't report on it.
Most Americans never  learned that the Reagan administration had been meeting with neo-Nazis who in  turn were in bed with racketeers, and that the leader of these neo-Nazis had  discussed assassinating Jimmy Carter and other government officials in 1977.
Furthermore, the major media failed to follow up First Camera's work, even  though it was a presidential election year in which the news value of the story  was potentially very great.
One thing the national media did report was the outcome of the LaRouche v.  A/SC trial that fall.
Finding that NBC had not libeled LaRouche, the jury awarded  it $3 million on a counterclaim (later knocked down to $200,000 by the judge).
On  the surface, this appeared to be a major defeat for LaRouche, but it was arguably  a victory for him on a deeper level.
The suit had squelched negative media  coverage of him earlier in the year that might have cost him millions of dollars in  loans and donations.
And in spite of the trial's outcome, the media remained  super-cautious.
For instance, the jury had found that the defendants were not  liable for calling LaRouche a "small-time Hitler," but this did not loosen the taboo  against hard labels for LaRouche.
The Washington Post finally followed up the     LaRouche-Reagan story (the only major paper to do so), but reporter John Mintz  was apparently not allowed by his editors to deal forthrightly with LaRouche's  political views.
The result was that Mintz's excellent series was left with a gaping  hole: who, what, when, but no why.
This omission was seen in all subsequent  major media coverage.
LaRouche, it appeared, had established a state of affairs  almost strange beyond belief: He was able to run for president of the United  States, gain over a million dollars in matching funds, force TV networks to sell  him millions of dollars of prime time for his scurrilous campaign ads — and  meanwhile deny to the public the opportunity to hear strong criticisms of his  policies and program.
After the 1986 Illinois primary, it was more important than ever to give the public  accurate information about LaRouche.
At first it appeared that blunt, accurate  terms might become acceptable.
The media did quote Adiai Stevenson III as  calling the LaRouchians neo-Nazis.
Senator Moynihan likewise used this  designation in a Manhattan speech.
Many journalists were aware of the truth, but  the major media, Jewish organizations, and the Democratic Party decided to  stick to soft terms that wouldn't disturb anyone (the Times went so far as to  censor out the forbidden word in its coverage of Moynihan's speech).
Some  newspapers continued to call LaRouche a "rightist," but conservatives began to  object.
The Wall Street Journal published an editorial suggesting that LaRouche  was really still leftwing (the evidence it cited was conspiracy theories that actually  originated on the right).
Suddenly the fact that U.S. and West German ultra-  rightist networks had nurtured LaRouche and provided him with ideas, money,  and allies (not to mention weapons training) for the previous ten years became  too controversial to dwell on.
Newspapers avoided giving offense to the right by  adopting the neutral term "political extremist" or by saying LaRouche had a  "mixed" philosophy.
The New York Times called him "eccentric" and a  "conspiracy theorist" while announcing that he somehow defied classification in  conventional terms.
Meanwhile most of the media promoted the kook theory, by  reminding the public over and over that LaRouche believes the Queen of  England pushes drugs.
The only serious analysis of LaRouche appeared in  smaller unorthodox weeklies such as the Chicago Reader, the Boston Phoenix  and In These Times.
LaRouche watcher Chip Berlet recalled his frustration at the  time: "I talked with dozens of reporters.
I'd send them LaRouche's writings.
Then  I'd lead them step-by-step through it on the phone, to show them it was classic  fascism.
I'd cite chapter and verse from Hannah Arendt's Origins of  Totalitarianism— hoy^ LaRouche fit like a glove.
They'd say, 'That's nice,' then  turn to their word processors and crank out some quip about Queen Elizabeth."
But behind the media's "soft" view of LaRouche there was often the rankest  hypocrisy.
While newspapers portrayed him as a kook they made editorial  judgments based on the assumption that he was indeed potentially dangerous —  so dangerous that his activities must be concealed from the public lest the truth  help his movement grow.
Jerome Chasen of the National Jewish Community  Relations Advisory Council, in a 1986 memorandum on LaRouche's Illinois     electoral victories, raised questions about this bizarre "quarantine" policy.
Inquiries by the NJCRC, he wrote, had uncovered that "the media in Illinois did  know that [Democratic primary candidates] Fairchild and Hart were LaRouchites,  and chose not to headline this information, based on a judgment that to do so  would give LaRouche a platform in statewide politics he did not deserve."
This attitude — don't write about an important story because we, the journalists,  believe the public can't handle it — would be regarded as downright unethical in  every area of journalism except the coverage of extremists.
Indeed, in other  areas it would be called a cover-up.
In this case it also involved an almost  comical inconsistency: The Chicago and national media had shown no such  restraint in the case of Farrakhan, the obscure Chicago preacher whom the  Republican Party and the media transformed in 1984 into America's most  celebrated anti-Semite.
The "quarantine" policy toward the LaRouchians persisted after the flap over the  Illinois primaries.
NDPC candidates continued to get high vote percentages in all  parts of the country, yet none of the media reported on this in depth.
In the fall of  1986, the ADL published a study of the LaRouche grassroots primary vote  nationwide.
Many reporters glanced at the figures, noted that the LaRouchians  had not won any more major primaries, and declared them to be defeated.
It was  the double standard once again: If Farrakhan's Nation of Islam or the Ku Klux  Klan had run 330 candidates of whom nearly 50 percent received over 10  percent of the vote (the actual statistics in the ADL report) both the ADL and the  media would have sounded the alarm from the rooftops.
For the media in this  case, it was also part of the continuing lack of curiosity about anything beneath  the surface relating to LaRouche.
The Washington Journalism Review did a  piece, "Letting LaRouche Off," which commented on the lack of vigorous  reporting.
It had no effect.
When Senate hearings in 1988 unearthed LaRouche's  ties to General Noriega, most of the media didn't mention it, much less follow it  up, even though anything relating to Noriega was supposedly important news at  the time.
Again, when the LaRouchians were identified in the summer of 1988 as  being behind the false rumors of Michael Dukakis's undergoing psychiatric  treatment, no one in the media bothered to look at their antecedent political  trickery, and the rumor was thus presented as an isolated incident.
The confusion and see-no-evil attitude toward LaRouche was often far worse in  political circles than in the newsrooms.
This spell was broken temporarily after  the Illinois primary victories.
Democrats in several states did vigorously oppose  LaRouchian candidates, although they were not always successful in preventing  them from receiving sizable votes.
As we have seen, the two LaRouche AIDS  referendums in California gained very large vote totals.
But the issue of just how  vulnerable to manipulation the electorate can be, and just how poorly society's  early-warning system functions, never had to be seriously addressed.
In October  1986, federal and state authorities raided the LaRouche organization's Virginia  headquarters and the indictments began.
Many observers figured that the     downfall of LaRouche was not far off and that the NCLC would revert to nuisance  status.
A resurgence of high vote percentages for LaRouche candidates in 1988  was thus largely ignored, and when LaRouche was convicted of loan fraud that  December it indeed appeared possible that the end was near for his remarkable  political career.
If so, it will be a victory on the cheap.
It will not have resulted in any sense from a  strengthening of the grassroots resistance to his far-right extremism.
On the  contrary, it will be a direct result of the weakness of that resistance.
LaRouche,  facing so little opposition and attracting so many closet collaborators in the early  and mid-1 980s, came to regard himself as invulnerable.
For this reason alone, he  became reckless in his fundraising methods, eliciting massive complaints to the  authorities from fraud victims.
The result was deep legal trouble for his  movement and a situation in which his opponents could tell themselves that it  was no longer necessary to fight him politically.
The problem of strengthening the  political immune system was thus postponed until either the LaRouche  movement refurbished itself and launched a counterattack or some new ultra-  right organization emerged to ape LaRouche's brilliant political innovations while  avoiding his financial mistakes and his excessive paranoia.
In the meantime, the relief with which the Democratic Party, Jewish  organizations, the left, and the media resigned the problem of LaRouche into the  hands of the FBI bore more than a touch of Weimar Republic decadence, all the  more so since it was nof political pressure that led to the indictments but simply  LaRouche's out-of-control fundraising.
One prosecutor in the LaRouche cases  described his annoyance at calls from reporters asking such questions as "Do  you think this will destroy LaRouche?"
(as if it were the Justice Department's  business to wage political battles rather than simply enforce the law).
Those who would project a political role onto law enforcement, hoping it will do  what political leaders are unable or unwilling to do, only prove that the moral  flabbiness on which demagogues thrive is still with us.
Given this fact, the  lessons of LaRouche's rise and apparent fall are important.
If we study them  seriously and act on them, it may turn out that the LaRouche phenomenon was a  blessing in disguise — a dry run, under relatively safe conditions, that revealed our  hitherto unsuspected weaknesses without our having to pay a heavy price for this  knowledge.
One thing seems certain: America is too violent and diverse — and  too vulnerable to economic crisis — to avoid forever a major internal challenge  from some form of totalitarian demagoguery.
When that test comes, the story of  Lyndon LaRouche may provide the key to an effective and timely response.
Dedication     To those journalists with whom I have worked mostly closely on the  LaRouche story: Russ Bellant, Chip Berlet, Bryan Chitwood, Ed  Kayatt and Patricia Lynch.
Without their input, this book could never  have been written.
Acl<nowledgments     The uncovering of the LaRouche conspiracy in America has been a collective  endeavor in which many journalists and editors have made important  contributions.
Chip Berlet, the dean of LaRouche watchers, has tracked the  NCLC in dozens of articles since 1975.
Patricia Lynch of NBC-TV first cracked  the story of LaRouche's White House connection.
Bryan Chitwood was the  reporter on the scene in Leesburg, Virginia, who did the most exhaustive work in  1986-88 on the LaRouchians' financial misdeeds and attempts to obstruct justice.
Russ Bellant probed their relations with the Republican Party and their activities  in Detroit.
Ed Kayatt, publisher and editor of the Manhattan weekly Our Town,  fought LaRouche for over eight years, in the teeth of lawsuits and harassment  which would have caused many publishers to back off.
In addition, this book draws upon the work of John Rees, Greg Rose, Joe  Conason, Joel Bellman, Jude Draft, John Mintz, Chuck Eager, Harvey Kahn,  Paul Valentine, Mark Arax, Howard Blum, and Paul Montgomery.
Journalists who  gave generously of their time on various research points include Bob Windrem,  Bruce McColm, Jim Hougan, and Linda Hunt.
Dan Moldea's classic investigative  work The Hoffa l/1/arswas a source of inspiration as well as a gold mine of facts.
University of Chicago graduate student Daniel Messinger provided information on  LaRouche's electoral activities.
The late Ered Christopher of the New York  Conservative Party gave me an initial orientation about LaRouche's conspiracy  theories without which I could never have understood them.
Eormer High Times  news editor Bob LaBrasca strongly encouraged my probe of LaRouche's  connections to the Teamsters union.
This book includes materials from interviews and joint investigations conducted  with Patricia Lynch, Ronald Radosh, and Kalev Pehme, who have my gratitude.
Where John Mintz of The Washington Post re-interviewed persons that Radosh  and I earlier interviewed for The New Republic, I have sometimes quoted from  the Mintz interviews with his permission,   I owe a special debt to Kevin Coogan for allowing me to use findings from his  unpublished manuscript, "The Mystery of Lyndon LaRouche."
Especially, I am  indebted to him for digging out the writings of LaRouche's father and illuminating     the murky circumstances surrounding Roy Frankliouser's 1975 trial.
His  manuscript delves into many fascinating areas which my book does not deal  with, and I hope it will find a publisher before long.
In the years I worked the LaRouche beat, I was without the protection of a large  news organization.
I wish to thank the attorneys who represented me pro bono in  lawsuits initiated by the LaRouchians: Steve Bundy and Frank Barron of Cravath,  Swaine and Moore in 1980-81; Phil Hirschkop in 1984; and Randolph Scott-  McLaughlin, Raphael Lopez, and Morton Stavis of the Center for Constitutional  Rights also in 1984.
In addition, I am grateful to attorneys Weldon Brewer,  Ramsey Clark, Jerry Nadler, and Eli Rosenbaum for their advice at various  points.
Financial help in writing this book was provided by the Smith-Richardson  Foundation, the Stern Fund, and the League for Industrial Democracy, I  especially thank Arch Puddington and Gail Wolfe of the LID for their generous  assistance.
For research help, I am deeply indebted to the staff of New York University's  Tamiment Institute and to the research and fact-finding divisions of the Anti-  Defamation League of B'nai B'rith.
Gail Gans at the ADL chased down scores of  documents for me over the years, while ADL fact-finding director Irwin Suall  offered invaluable advice at many points.
For help on LaRouche's early career I  thank the staff of the Prometheus Library.
The following individuals provided vital encouragement over the years this book  was in preparation: John Ranz, Sheldon Ranz, Lenny Lopate, the late Mannie  Goldstein, Guy Hawtin, David Hacker, Rita Freedman, A. J. Weberman, Linda  Ray, Dave Phillips, Anne-Marie Vidal, Arnold Sperber, Aron Kay, Bob Roistacher,  Stanley Pinsley, Vanessa Weber, John Train, John Hitz, Lyn Wells, Lenny  Zeskin, Jack Newfield, Dave Pollock, Marvin Sochet, Frank Touchet and Jack  Finn.
For their special personal support, I thank my father Arnold King, Denise Beck,  Kevin Coogan, Michael Hudson, Katy Morgan, Kalev Pehme, Leslie Smith, and  "Simon," as well as my five colleagues to whom this book is dedicated.
Michael Hudson and Kalev Pehme did invaluable editorial work on the final  manuscript and also provided many insights into LaRouche's financial empire.
Finally, I am deeply grateful to my agents, Peter Miller and Laurie Perkins, and  my editor at Doubleday, Patrick Filley, without whom this book would not have  been possible.
CHAPTER REFERENCES for Lyndon  LaRouche and the New American  Fascism   The following abbreviations are used throughout the notes section:   EIR: Executive Intelligence Review   ICLC: International Caucus of Labor Committees   LHL: Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr.
LM: Lyn Marcus (pen name of LHL prior to 1976)   NCLC: National Caucus of Labor Committees   NDPC: National Democratic Policy Committee   NS: New Solidarity   NSIPS: New Solidarity International Press Service   TC: The Campaigner   USLP: United States Labor Party   CHAPTER ONE   "NASTY DUCKLING": Paul L. Montgomery, "How a Radical-Left Group Moved  Toward Savagery," New York Times, Jan. 20, 1974.
CHILDHOOD ISOLATION AND BULLYING: LHL, The Power of Reason: A Kind  of an Autobiography {b\e\N York: New Benjamin Franklin Publishing House,  1979), pp. 38-39.
FAMILY SECTARIANISM: LHL, The Power of Reason, pp. 35-39; Hezekiah  Micajah Jones (Lyndon H. LaRouche, Sr.), Present Day Quaf<erisnn in New  England, privately published pamphlet, 1937; Vin McLellan, "Meet Lyn Marcus:  The Marxist Messiah," Boston Phoenix, Jan. 29, 1974.
THE "WITCH MOTHER" THEME: LM, "The Politics of Male Impotence," NCLC  internal document, Aug. 16, 1973; LM, "Mothers' Fears," NCLC internal  document, Sept. 11, 1973; LM, "The Case of Ludwig Feuerbach," TC, Dec. 1973.
RESENTMENT IN HIGH SCHOOL: LHL, The Power of Reason, pp. 55-56; LHL,  "How the Classics Were Lost," and "Mrs. Babbitt Destroyed the U.S.A.," TC, Oct.
1981.
LIFE IN CPS CAMP: LHL, "American Friends of Sodomy Committee," Part II, NS,  Nov. 10, 1978.
ARMY ENLISTMENT: LM, "The Conceptual History of the Labor Committees,"  TC, Oct. 1974, p. 9; LHL, The Power of Reason, pp. 58-59.
MARXIST ACTIVITIES IN INDIA: LM, "The Conceptual History of the Labor  Committees," p. 9; EIR ed., LaRouche: Will This Man Become President?
(New  York: New Benjamin Franklin Publishing House, 1983), pp. 44-46.
SANITIZED VERSION OF LEFTIST BACKGROUND: EIR ed., LaRouche: Will  This Man Become President?
, p. 46.
MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE: LHL, The Power of Reason, pp. 31-34.
"NO REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT.
.
.
UNLESS I BROUGHT IT INTO BEING":  Paul W. Valentine, "The Newest Left," Washington Post, Feb. 17, 1974.
CHAPTER TWO   BACKGROUND ON THE SDS YEARS: LM, "The Conceptual History of the  Labor Committees," TC, Oct. 1974; "The History of the Labor Committee,"  intermittent series in Solidarity (later renamed New Solidarity), Dec. 18, 1970,  through Apr. 12, 1971 (various authors).
PLANS FOR CADRE ORGANIZATION: LM, "How the Workers League  Decayed," NCLC internal document, June 27, 1970, p. 18.
LEAVING THE TROTSKYIST "SEWER": LM, "The Conceptual History of the  Labor Committees," pp. 12-13.
NCLC CLAIMS THAT IT PENETRATED SDS FOR THE GOVERNMENT: "Anti-  Semitism" Libel Against Lyndon Hermyle LaRouche, Jr., NDPC pamphlet, Jan.
25, 1983, p. 10.
FBI AND POLICE HARASSMENT: LaRouche v. Webster, U.S. District Court,  Southern District of New York, 75 Civ.
6010, Plaintiff's Second Amended  Complaint, Apr. 2, 1982; Edward Spannaus, "The Documentary History of FBI  Operations Against Lyndon LaRouche and the NCLC," NS series beginning July  11, 1983.
CYNICAL VIEW OF LEFT-WING FACTIONALISM: LM, "How the Workers  League Decayed," pp. 1, 9.
CHAPTER THREE   LAROUCHE ON FASCISM: LM, "Growth of Fascist Movements," Part II,  Solidarity (later renamed New Solidarity), June 1 4, 1 971 .
MOP UP DOCUMENTS: "Deadly Crisis for CPUSA," NS, Mar. 12, 1973; "Death  of tine CPUSA," NS, Apr. 9, 1973; "Operation Mop-Up: Tine Class Struggle Is for  Keeps," NS, Apr. 16, 1973; "The CP Within Us," NCLC internal document, Apr.
22, 1973; "Their Morals and Ours," NS, Apr. 23, 1973; "CP Recruiting  Pallbearers for Its Own Funeral," NS, Apr. 30, 1973; "Mop-Up Has Changed the  Way You Think," NS, May 21 , 1 973.
PHILADELPHIA MOP UP: Mark Manoff, "NCLC: The 'Flesh and Bones'  Approach," The Drummer, May 29, 1973.
FBI INTERVENTION IN MOP UP: Socialist Worl<ers Party v. Attorney General of  the United States, U.S. District Court, Southern District of New York, 73 Civ.
3160, Final Report of the Special Master (Judge Charles D. Breitel), Feb. 4,  1980.
Printed as pamphlet: What the FBI Spies D/c/(New York: Political Rights  Defense Fund, 1980).
CHAPTER FOUR   TAKING AWAY BEDROOMS: LM, "The Politics of Male Impotence," NCLC  internal document, Aug. 16, 1973.
THEORY OF SUDDEN PERSONALITY CHANGE: LM, "'Trotskyism' As  Organized Sexual Impotence," NCLC internal document, Aug. 20, 1973.
DEFECTORS' DESCRIPTIONS OF NCLC PSYCHOLOGICAL TECHNIOUES  AND SESSIONS: Christine Berl and Henry Weinfeld, open letter to NCLC  membership, Apr. 2, 1974; Marian Kester, "Thinking the Unthinkable," NCLC  factional document, Aug. 15, 1974.
THE ALLEGED BRAINWASHING OF WHITE: Christopher White, "On the Track  of My Assassins," TC, Feb. -Mar. 1974; LM, "Uncover CIA-Police Plot to Take  Over U.S. -Discover Method to De-program Victims of CIA and Soviet Psycho-  Sexual Brainwashing," NS special supplement (includes text of LHL's Jan. 3,  1974, speech describing alleged tortures).
WITCHES AND HISSING SOUNDS: Carol White, "Intake Procedure for  Suspected Brainwashing Cases," NCLC internal document, 1974.
PARANOIA ABOUT CHRISTINE BERL: LM, "Why Christine Berl Could Be  Turned into a Zombie," NCLC internal document, Apr. 1, 1974.
TECHNIQUES OF BRAINWASHING AS ALLEGEDLY PRACTICED BY CIA  AND OTHER NCLC FOES: LM, "The Real CIA~the Rockefellers' Fascist  Establishment," TC, Apr. 1974; M. Minnicino, "Low Intensity Operations: The  Reesian Theory of War," TC, Apr. 1974; LM, "Rockefeller's 1984 Plot," TC, Feb.-  Mar. 1 974; LM, "Uncover CIA-Police Plot to Take Over U.S."     CHAPTER FIVE   THEORY OF ETHNIC FASCISM: LM, "Growth of Fascist Movements," Part II,  Solidarity (later renamed New Solidarity), June 1 4, 1 971 .
"PURE RAGE" SPEECH: LM, "Build a Revolutionary Youth Movement!
," NS,  June 10, 1973 (excerpts).
DRILL-INSTRUCTOR METHODS, RESPONSE OF GANG MEMBERS: Howard  Blum, "Marx and the Outlaws: Recruiting in the Ghetto," Village Voice, June 6,  1974.
ATTACKS ON BARAKA: Costas Axios (Konstandinos Kalimtgis) and Nikos  Syvriotis (Criton Zoakos), Papa Doc Baraka: Fascism in Newark, NCLC  pamphlet, 1 973; "Answer to the CIA: Destroy Baraka!
," NS, Aug. 1 7, 1 973.
BLACK MEMBERS INTERNALIZE NCLC RACISM: Allen Salisbury and Dennis  Speed, "The Fight Against Black Magic," NS, June 22, 1974.
CALL FOR ANTI-ZIONIST UNITY: LaRouclie Tells Black Leaders: We'll Destroy  the Zionists Politically, USLP leaflet, Aug. 23, 1979   CHAPTER SIX   STRATEGY FOR INFILTRATING THE RIGHT: Gregory F. Rose, "The Swarmy  Life and Times of the NCLC," National Review, Mar. 30, 1979.
LAROUCHE EMBRACES THE SPOTLIGHT'S VIEW OF ZIONISM: LHL, "Walter  Mondale British Agent," NS, Sept. 2, 1977.
"GIDEON'S ARMY": LHL, What Every Conservative Should Know About  Communism (New York: New Benjamin Franklin House Publishing Company,  1980), p. vi.
EARLY EXAMPLES OF NCLC ANTI-SEMITISM: LM, "The Case of Ludwig  Feuerbach," TC, Dec. 1973, p. 37; Nancy Spannaus, "Israeli Psychosis:  Rockefeller's Solution to the Jewish Ouestion," TC, Aug. 1975, p. 59.
VIENNESE REFUGEES, CHOLERA CULTURE, "PUS": LHL, The Case of  Walter Lippmann (New York: Campaigner Publications, 1977), p. 121.
CHRIST KILLERS: LHL, "New Pamphlet to Document Cult Origins of Zionism,"  NS, Dec. 8, 1978.
"KOSHER NOSTRA": Mark Burdman, "Begin Gov't Links to Crime Publicized in  France," War on Drugs (magazine), Nov. 1980.
"PURE EVIL": LHL, "Zionism and the 'Zionist Lobby,'" NS, Aug. 22, 1978.
"NATIONAL SECURITY RISK": "Register the Zionist Lobby as Foreign Agents!
,"  NS, Sept. 5, 1978.
"ZOMBIE-NATION": LHL, "New Pamphlet to Document Cult Origins of Zionism."
"NAUSEATING JEWISH HYPOCRISY": "For Peace in the Mideast, Dump the  Jewish Lobby!
," NS, Mar. 17, 1978.
PASSIVITY OF LOWER-LEVEL NCLC MEMBERS: Linda Ray, "Breaking the  Silence: An Ex-LaRouche Follower Tells Her Story," In These Times, Oct. 29,  1986.
ONLY ONE AND A HALF MILLION KILLED IN HOLOCAUST: LHL, "New  Pamphlet to Document Cult Origins of Zionism"; "LaRouche Reaffirms '1 .5  Millions' Analysis," NSIPS news release, Jan. 1 7, 1 981 .
"MORAL ANAESTHETIZATION" AND THE VOLKSWAGEN JOKE: Alice and  Don Roth, "A Method in the Madness," open letter to NCLC members, Feb. 3,  1981.
JEWS ALLEGEDLY PUT HITLER IN POWER: LHL, "Hitler: Runaway British  Agent," NS, Jan. 10, 1978; LHL, "The Truth About 'German Collective Guilt,'"  Parti, NS, Oct. 10, 1978.
"SOUND AND INTENSE.
.
.
ENTHUSIASM" OF NAZIS TO CRUSH BRITAIN: LHL,  "Hitler: Runaway British Agent."
HITLER'S CRIMES A "SLIGHT MISTAKE" IN COMPARISON TO PLANS OF  ZIONISTS: LHL, speech to Michigan Anti-Drug Coalition, May 20, 1979,  published in NS, June 8, 1979; see editorial correction, June 15, 1979.
WARNING TO JEWISH NCLC MEMBERS: LHL, "New Pamphlet to Document  the Cult Origins of Zionism."
CHAPTER SEVEN   INSURRECTION FANTASIES: LM, "The Art of Insurrection," NS, June 5, 1972.
DOCTRINE OF PARTISAN WARFARE: Uwe Parpart, "Deploying a  Revolutionary Army: The Model of Yugoslav Proletarian Brigades," and Warren  Hamerman, "The Development of Tito's Revolutionary Army," NS, Aug. 31,1 974.
DENUNCIATION OF DEMOCRACY: LHL, "Creating a Republican Labor Party,"  NS, June 22, 1979.
FASCISM BECOMES A MASS MOVEMENT ONLY IF SOCIETY'S "LEADING  STRATA" DECIDE TO SPONSOR IT: LM, "The Conceptual History of the Labor  Committees," TC, Oct. 1974, p. 25.
HOW TO BUILD A COALITION AND FUNCTION AS THE VANGUARD WITHIN  IT: LHL, "Creating a Republican Labor Party"; LaRouche, "A Machiavellian  Solution for Israel," TC, Mar. 1978, esp.
pp. 29-31.
THE DEBT CRISIS: LHL, Operation Juarez, EIR special report, Aug. 2, 1982.
RIDDING THE EARTH OF OLIGARCHS AND CREATING THE "GOLDEN  SOULS": LHL, The Power of Reason {Ne\N York: New Benjamin Franklin  Publishing House, 1979), pp. 194-95.
SUPPRESSION OF POLITICAL DISSENT: LHL, "Creating a Republican Labor  Party."
REJECTION OF ELECTIONS AND PARLIAMENTS: LHL, "NATO in Caesar's  Foolish Footsteps," NS, Nov. 1, 1977.
DICTATORSHIP OF MONETARISTS VERSUS DICTATORSHIP OF  INDUSTRIAL CAPITALISTS: LHL, The Case of Walter Lippmann (New York:  Campaigner Publications, 1977), pp. 92, 97, 142.
UNITY OF LABOR AND CAPITAL AGAINST THE MONETARISTS: LHL,  Lippmann, p. 92; LHL, "Creating a Republican Labor Party."
DICTATORSHIP BY AN ELITE: LHL, Lippmann, pp. 91, 144.
ONLY THE ELITE CAN SHAPE LAWS: "The German Constitutional State and  Terrorism," TC, Feb. 1978, p. 24.
DEFINITION OF FREEDOM: LHL, Lippmann, p. 68; also see p. 91.
GOOD AND EVIL THOUGHTS AND THE STRUGGLE AGAINST EVIL  THOUGHTS: LHL, Lippmann, pp. 129, 140.
RIGHT TO LIVE AS A FREE MAN DEPENDS ON OBEDIENCE TO STATE:  LHL, Lippmann, p. 69.
THE CRIMINAL MIND: LHL, Lippmann, pp. 94-95; "The German Constitutional  State and Terrorism," pp. 40-42.
SURGICAL POLICE OPERATIONS: LHL, U.S. Labor Party Security Services  (sales brochure), July 15, 1978; "Two Approaches to the Law Enforcement  Crisis," EIR, Apr. 14, 1981.
THE MULTITIERED ENEMY CONSPIRACY: LHL, "How to Analyze and Uproot  International Terrorism," NS, Feb. 17, 1978; "Register the Zionist Lobby as  Foreign Agents!
," NS, Sept. 5, 1978.
PURGING THE JEWS: "Register the Zionist Lobby as Foreign Agents!"
; "A War-  winning Strategy," NS, Mar. 21, 1978.
DENIAL OF CITIZENSHIP TO THE MASSES: LHL, "Creating a Republican  Labor Party."
CRITIOUE OF HITLER'S VERSION OF TOTAL MOBILIZATION: LHL,  Lippmann, pp. 8-9.
THE NCLC'S TOTAL MOBILIZATION: LHL, "Free Naval Policy from Geopolitics,"  EIR, Aug. 4, 1981 ; LHL, "American Rearmament Potential: Why a 'Ouick Fix'  Won't Work," EIR, July 29, 1 980; LHL, "What Are Economic Shock Waves?
,"  EIR, Dec. 14.
1982; LHL, IVIilitary Policy of the LaRouche Administration, Citizens  for LaRouche campaign pamphlet, 1979; LHL, "Peace-Through-Strength  Disorientation," NS.
Aug. 15, 1978; LHL, "A Return to Federalist-Whig Military  Policy," Parts I and II, NS, Sept. 8 and Sept. 12, 1978; LHL, "The Political  Economy of Military Posture," NS, Feb. 11,1 977.
IN-DEPTH WAR-FIGHTING PYRAMID, TRANSFORMATION OF  EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM, "SOLDIER-CITIZENS": LHL, IVIilitary Policy of tine  LaRouche Administration, pp. 4, 10-13.
WAGE WAR, ESTABLISH GLOBAL HEGEMONY, BRING FORCES OF EVIL  UNDER "FIRM-HANDED" RULE: LHL, "The Disorienting Heritage of Clausewitz,"  NS, June 16, 1978.
"PROGRESSIVE LIOUIDATION," VICTORY OVER LAST ENEMY BASTION:  LHL, "A Return to Federalist-Whig Military Policy," Part II, NS, Sept. 12, 1978.
CRITIOUE OF HITLER'S TWO-FRONT STRATEGY: LHL, "A Return to  Federalist-Whig Military Policy," Part II.
BACKHANDED PRAISE OF HITLER ("LONDON'S MOST DEADLY ENEMY")  AND CRITICISM OF HIM FOR NOT COMPLETING THE CONOUEST OF  BRITAIN: LHL, "Hitler: Runaway British Agent," NS, Jan. 10, 1978; LHL, "The  Truth About 'German Collective Guilt,'" Part I, NS, Oct. 10, 1978; LHL, "London  Pushes Toward World War III," NS, Mar. 3, 1978.
DENIAL OF THE FULL SOVEREIGNTY OF NATIONS: LHL, Lippmann, pp. 170-  71.
U.S. SHOULD DECLARE WAR ON BRITAIN: LHL, "Peace-Through-Strength  Disorientation"; "A War-winning Strategy."
TOTAL WAR AND "ABC" WARFARE: LHL, "Harold Brown Is Nuts!
," NS, Jan. 31 ,  1978; LHL, "London Pushes Toward World War III."
ESTIMATE OF LOSSES: LHL, "London Pushes Toward World War III"; LHL,  Military Policy of the LaRouche Administration.
OCCUPATION POLICY AND CITYBUILDING: LHL, "A Return to Federalist-Whig  Military Policy," Part II.
TIMUR AS ROLE MODEL: "Marlowe's Tamburlaine: The Will to Win," NS, Jan.
17, 1983.
CHAPTER EIGHT   EARLY LAROUCHIAN SUPPORT FOR STAR WARS WEAPONRY: Sputnik of  tfie Seventies: Tfie Science Behiind tfie Soviets' Beam Weapon, USLP pamphlet,  1977.
A. P. ALEKSANDROV: "Soviet Science Chief Rebuts 'Greenies,'" Fusion, Feb.
1980.
CHAPTER NINE   LAROUCHE'S RESPONSE TO REAGAN'S STAR WARS SPEECH: "Prominent  Democrat Praises Reagan Strategic Policy," NS, Apr. 1, 1983.
LAROUCHIANS PUBLISH WINTERBERG ON NUCLEAR WEAPONS:  Friedwardt Winterberg, "Some Reminiscences About the Origins of Inertial  Confinement," Fusion, Nov. 1979; Winterberg, The Physical Principles of  Thermonuclear Explosive Devices (New York: Fusion Energy Foundation, 1981).
LAROUCHE'S SDI "SPILLOVER" THEORY: LHL, "National Academy of Science  Wonders: Is Lyndon LaRouche Also a Scientist?
," NS, Sept. 22, 1986.
ATTACK ON RICHARD PERLE AS "MOSSAD-LINKED" AGENT: "Japanese  Elite Hear Strategic, Economic Dimensions of SDI," EIR, May 2, 1986.
CHAPTER TEN     BARDWELL SPEAKS OUT: Steven Bardwell, "Third Rome Hypothesis," ICLC  internal document, Jan. 13.
1984.
RECURRENT PHOTOGRAPH SUGGESTING A SWASTIKA: Fusion, May 1978,  p. 40; NS, Sept. 3, 1984; NS, Feb. 22, 1985; Fusion, July-Aug.
1985, p. 25.
LIVING SPACE OF THIRD REICH: Deutsche-Bergwerks Zeitung, March 8,  1942, cited in Jean-Michel Angebert, The Occult and the Third Reich (New York:  Macmillan Publishing Company, 1974), p. 227.
MADOLE'S SWASTIKA MYSTICISM: "NRP Leader Gives Lecture on The Occult & Fascism' at New York's Warlock Shop," The National Renaissance Bulletin,  June-July-Aug.
1977.
LAROUCHE'S GRAND DESIGN, SDI-STYLE: LHL, "Wassily Leontief Acts to  Block Effective Implementation of the SDI," Fusion, July-Aug.
1985.
ZENKER'S DEFENSE OF NAZI WAR CRIMINALS: Kurt P. Tauber, Beyond  Eagle and Swastika: German Nationalism Since 1945 (Middletown, Conn.:  Wesleyan University Press, 1967), Vol.
I, pp. 309-10; Vol.
II, pp. 1152-53 (nn.
VIII, 173-75).
SCHERER'S DEFENSE OF LAROUCHE: "Poison Weapons of Psychological  Terror Against Lyndon LaRouche," testimony of Brig. Gen. Paul-Albert Scherer at  LaRouchian hearings, Sept. 1987, published in EIR, Sept. 25, 1987.
NAZI SCIENTISTS ABSOLVED OF MORAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR ROLE IN  WORLD WAR II: LHL, "The Lesson of Nazi Jet Aircraft Development," EIR, Aug.
11, 1981.
GLORIFICATION OF PEENEMUNDE: LHL, "The Lesson of Nazi Jet Aircraft  Development"; Marsha Freeman, "The Truth About the German Rocket  Scientists: The Men Who Built America's Space Program," NS, four-part series.
May 20, 1985-June21, 1985.
LAROUCHE'S FRIENDSHIP WITH EHRICKE: Ken Kelley, "The Interview: The  World According to Lyndon LaRouche," San Francisco Focus, Nov. 1986, p. 155.
LAROUCHE PUBLICATIONS DEPICT RUDOLPH AS INNOCENT VICTIM: "ADL  Spews out Smear Against Eminent German Scientist," NS, Apr. 1985.
OPPOSITION TO JUSTICE DEPARTMENT NAZI HUNTERS: "Stop OSI Assault  on German-American Scientists!
," NS, July 1, 1985; "Schiller Meet: Drop OSI,  Start Crash SDI Effort," NS, June 24, 1985; "Disband the OSI!
," NS, July 1, 1985.
LIST OF MARTYRS EXPANDS: "Demjanjuk Frame-up Flounders as New  Evidence of KGB Fraud Emerges," EIR, Feb. 5, 1988; "Brief Case Histories of  Some Recent Examples of KGB Justice Against Some Other American Citizens,"  fact sheet of the International Human Rights Commission, c/o Schiller Institute,  Nov. 1986.
PROCEEDINGS OF KRAFFT EHRICKE CONFERENCE: Colonize Space!
Open  the Age of Reason {b\e\N York: New Benjamin Franklin Publishing House, 1985);  see esp.
LHL, "Krafft Ehricke's Enduring Contribution to the Future Generations  of Global and Interplanetary Civilization," pp. 27-54.
CITYBUILDING IN SPACE, COSMIC SPIRALS, INSPIRATION FROM NAZI  SCIENTISTS: LHL, "Design of Cities in the Age of Mars Colonization," EIR, Sept.
11, 1987.
DEATH-RAY SEMINAR IN MUNICH: LHL, "Nonlinear Radiation: The True Total  War," EIR, Sept. 18, 1987.
CHAPTER ELEVEN   DEBRA FREEMAN'S 1978 CAMPAIGN: U.S. Labor Party's Freeman Goes to  Congress: Ending 200 Years of Zionist Trade in Blaci< Commodities, TC special  report, 1978.
LAROUCHE'S PLANS FOR NEW HAMPSHIRE PRIMARY: "New Hampshire  Primary Is a Test for the War on Liberalism," NS, Aug. 24, 1 979.
EARLY SPLASH IN NEW HAMPSHIRE: "'Menace' or Best Bet in N.H.?
," Boston  Globe, Nov. 20, 1979.
BIZARRE BEHAVIOR DURING PRIMARY: "LaRouche 'Times' Series 'Lies and  Distortion,'" Manchester Union Leader, Oct. 12, 1980; "LaRouche Says They're  Trying to Murder Him," Manchester Union Leader, Feb. 2, 1980.
TARGETING SENIOR CITIZENS IN NEW HAMPSHIRE: "LaRouche's N.H.  Campaign Tactics Assailed," Washington Star, Feb. 23, 1980.
THEORY OF "CONTAINMENT WALL": LHL, "Keeping a Fixed Identity in a  Changing World," NCLC internal document, undated, late 1970s.
CHAPTER TWELVE   MAYOR KOCH, THE LAROUCHIANS AND THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY:  "Barbaro Criticizes Koch for Refusing to Hold One-on-One Debates," New York  Times, Aug. 27, 1981; U.S. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, "Lyndon H.     LaRouche and the Democratic Party," text of speech delivered at IVIount Sinat  Jewish Center, New York City, IVIar.
23, 1986; IVIoynihan, "The Links Between  LaRouche and New York Corruption," Op-Ed, New York Times, Apr. 1 , 1 986;  "For Koch, a Glowing Day," New York Times, Sept. 23, 1 981 .
NEW YORK TIMES'S TREATMENT OF KLENETSKY: "Klenetsky Calls Koch a  Special-Interest Tool," New York Times, Aug. 30, 1981 ; "Candidates for Mayor  on the Issues," New York Times, Sept. 20, 1981 ; "On the Edge in Politics," New  York Times, Sept. 21 , 1 981 ; "Mad Melvin: The Cult Candidate," Village Voice,  Sept. 2, 1981.
NDPC IN BALTIMORE, 1982-83: "Debra Freeman Unmasked," editorial,  Baltimore Evening Sun, Dec. 9, 1982 (commenting on three-part Evening Sun  series by Mark Arax on Freeman and the NDPC); Phyllis Orrick, "Gearing for  Smears: A Look at Local Labor Party Candidates," City Paper (Baltimore), May  27, 1983.
NDPC NATIONAL ELECTION ACTIVITY AND INROADS, 1982-1983: What Is  the NDPC?
, NDPC pamphlet, 1983; Warren J. Hamerman, "The LaRouche  Factor in U.S. Politics: 20%-40% Showing in the Elections," EIR, Jan. 4, 1983;  Warren J. Hamerman, "Run with the LaRouche Campaign!
A Call for Tens of  Thousands of Citizen Candidates," NS, Oct. 7.
1983.
NEW YORK SCHOOL BOARD RACE, 1983: Stanley E. Michels and Franz S.  Leichter, "How New Yorkers Defeated LaRouche," Op-Ed, New York Times, Apr.
3, 1986.
SURVEY OF GRASS-ROOTS LAROUCHE SUPPORTERS: John C. Green and  James L. Guth, "'Who Really Controls Us': A Profile of Lyndon LaRouche's  Campaign Contributors," unpublished report (Furman University), May 1986.
LAROUCHE TARGETS THE SPOTLIGHT'S READERSHIP AND OTHER  RIGHT-WING POPULISTS: LHL, What Every Conservative Should Know About  Communism (New York: New Benjamin Franklin Publishing House, 1980), pp.
v-  xiii.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN   NDPC CAMPAIGNING IN ILLINOIS PRIOR TO PRIMARY: "NDPC Begins 1986  Campaign with Illinois Slate," NS, Dec. 23, 1985; "Warrior Angels Campaign for  NDPC in Illinois," NS, Jan. 31, 1986; "LaRouche Illinois Drive Focused on Rural  Areas," New York Times, Mar. 31, 1986; "Farm Pitch: LaRouche Cultivates Rural  Support," St. Louis Post Dispatch, Apr. 7, 1986; "The Last Days of the Illinois  Campaign," NS, Apr. 14, 1986.
ANALYSIS OF THE LAROUCHE VICTORIES: "Ultraright Victories Scrutinized:  Voter Frustration May Explain Results," Washington Post, Mar. 26, 1986; "Voters  Responded to the Economic Issues," NS, Mar. 31,1 986; Tom Johnson, "A  Report on The LaRouche Factor' in Selected Downstate Counties in the 1986  Illinois Primary Election," unpublished study prepared for American Jewish  Committee, Mar. 31, 1986; Rhodes Cook, "LaRouche and His Followers: Angry,  Noisy and Persistent," Congressional Quarterly, Apr. 5, 1986; "Lyndon LaRouche  Tackles the Drug Lobby's Media," EIR, Apr. 18, 1986 (text of LHL's Apr. 9, 1986,  speech before the National Press Club); Robert B. Albritton, "The LaRouche  Victory in Illinois: An Analysis of the 1986 Democratic Primary Election Returns,"  report commissioned by American Jewish Committee, June 1986.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN   NATIONWIDE NDPC RESULTS IN 1986: The 1986 LaRouche Primary  Campaign: An Analysis, ADL report, Oct. 1986.
WHITE SUPREMACISTS HAIL LAROUCHE ILLINOIS VICTORIES: Robert  Miles, "USLP Rides Again," From the Mountain (newsletter), Mar.-Apr.
1986;  "Populists Hail 'Out Group' Victory," The Spotlight, Mar. 31, 1986.
OTHER RIGHT-WING GROUPS LEARN FROM LAROUCHE: Leonard Zeskin,  "Watch for Far Right to Try a Larger Strategy in '88 Elections," The Monitor  (newsletter of Center for Democratic Renewal), Aug. 1987.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN   DUKAKIS MENTAL HEALTH SMEAR: Rowland Evans and Robert Novak,  "Dukakis Depression Rumors Backfire on Bush Campaign," syndicated column.
New York Post, Aug. 8, 1988; Anthony Lewis, "The Low Road," New York Times,  Aug. 28, 1988.
COALITION CHALLENGES CARTER'S 1976 VICTORY: "U.S. Labor Party, GOP  Join Forces in 4 Vote Challenges," Washington Post, Nov. 28, 1976.
SYSTEMATIC ATTEMPT TO WOO GOP AND CONSERVATIVES IN 1976:  Morton Blackwell, The Right Report, Nov. 19, 1976.
LAROUCHE'S 1978 POLITICAL PUNDITRY: "LaRouche to Reagan: Build a  Strong Whig Force," NS, May 19, 1978.
SAYS REAGAN IS BEST CANDIDATE, ATTACKS BUSH: LHL, "The  Incompetence of George Bush," front-page editorial, NS, Feb. 2, 1979.
PREDICTS CONSERVATIVE GROUNDSWELL: NS, Sept. 7, 1979.
RECOGNIZES THAT REAGAN IS REPUBLICAN FRONT-RUNNER IN NEW  HAMPSHIRE: NS, Aug. 24, 1979.
FEARS THAT REAGAN WILL MAKE A "FATAL" PLUNGE INTO THE  MAINSTREAM: "LaRouche Begins First National Campaign Tour," NS, Aug. 28,  1979.
LAROUCHE'S ATTACKS AGAINST BUSH IN NEW HAMPSHIRE: LHL, Is  Republican George Bush a "Manchurian Candidate"?
, Citizens for LaRouche  campaign leaflet, Jan. 12, 1980; George Canning, "The Bones in Bush's Closet,"  EIR, Jan. 22, 1980.
IMPACT OF TRILATERAL/SKULL AND BONES ISSUE: James M. Perry,  "Conspiracy Theorists Point Darkly to Bush as a Trilateralist," Wall Street  Journal, Feb. 26, 1980.
"BORAX" SALESMAN.
.
.
"MINCEMEAT": LHL, open letter to Democratic National  Committee, Jan. 4, 1980.
PAUL CORBIN AND "BRIEFINGATE": Jody Powell, The Other Side of the Story  (New York: William Morrow, 1984).
LAROUCHIANS OPPOSE PROBE: Briefingate: The KGB-FBI-Manatt Plot to  Destroy the U.S. Presidency NDPC pamphlet, 1983.
EIR INTERVIEWS WITH HIGH OFFICIALS: "Agriculture Secretary Block  Foresees U.S. Farm Export Push," May 12, 1981; "DOD's DeLauer Talks About  Technologies," Aug. 25, 1981 ; "Commerce Undersecretary Olmer on Trade and  Foreign Investment," Aug. 11,1 981 ; "Norman Ture Muses About an Industrial  Recovery Under Reagan," Aug. 4, 1981 ; "Justice Department's D. Lowell Jensen  Blasts Drugs and Domestic Terrorism," Apr, 7, 1981 ; "Weidenbaum: 'We Are All  Monetarists and Supply-Siders,'" Apr. 7, 1981 ; "Senator Hatch Talks About Brilab  Approach," Mar. 1 0, 1 981 ; "Senator Tower on Military Policy," Jan. 27, 1 981 .
ATTACKS ON HOLTZMAN AND THE OSI: "The OSI: How Criminals Cloak Their  Crimes," NS, Aug. 14, 1979; "Justice Dept.'s Bogus Nazi-Hunters," NS, July 31,  1979.
ANTI-JERRY BROWN SMEAR CAMPAIGN: Will Wertz, Tom Hayden's CED:  Brownshirts of the 1980s, Wertz for Senate campaign pamphlet, 1982.
ARTICLES FROM THE LANDMARK: "Secret Democratic U.S. Senate  Candidates Revealed," Mar. 29, 1984; "Ouotes from Hunt's New York City  Fundraisers," Mar. 29, 1984; "Jim Hunt Is Sissy, Prissy, Girlish and Effeminate,"  July 5, 1984; "The Hunt for Senate-Homosexual Connection Is Very Real," Oct.
25, 1984.
ATTACKS ON MONDALE AND PASTOR: Worse Than Jimmy Carter?
The Facts  About Mondale, Grenada, and the KGB, NDPC pamphlet, 1983.
TESTIMONY AT LIBEL TRIAL: LaRouche v. National Broadcasting Company,  U.S. District Court, Eastern District of Virginia, Civ.
Docket No. 84-01 36-A.
INNIS'S OPINION ON HITLER: Arnold Forster and Benjamin R. Epstein, The  New Anti-Semitism {Ney\/ York: McGraw-Hill, 1974), pp. 185-87.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN   LAROUCHE'S VIEWS ON PROPAGANDA: LHL, "Woodward's Book on Casey:  A Blend of Fact and Fiction," EIR, Oct. 16, 1987.
CALLS REAGAN "PUSSYWHIPPED": James Ridgeway.
"Secret Agent Man,"  interview with LHL, Village Voice, Oct. 13, 1987.
INDIRECT ALLUSIONS TO THE SO-CALLED JEWISH OUESTION: LHL, The  Pestilence of Usury, NDPC pamphlet, 1981 ; "Bring the Usurers to Justice!
," NS,  Jan. 21, 1983; "Does U.S. Mean Uncle Shylock?
," NS, Aug. 12, 1985; "Milton  Friedman Finally Gets His Pound of Flesh," NS, May 3, 1985.
CALLS SCHLESINGER "IMP OF EVIL": LHL, "A Ouery to the President: Is  Jimmy Carter Truly a Christian?
," NS, Oct. 13, 1978.
DRUG-PUSHING ALLEGATION: Konstandinos Kalimtgis et al..
Dope, Inc.:  Britain's Opium War Against the U.S. (New York: New Benjamin Franklin  Publishing House, 1978); Moscow's Secret Weapon: Ariel Sharon and the Israeli  Mafia, EIR special report.
Mar. 1, 1986, see esp.
pp. 12-21.
POLLARD PORTRAYED AS TYPICAL OF JEWS IN U.S. GOVERNMENT:  "Pollard Case: Soviet-Israeli Spies Will Be Exposed," NS, June 13, 1986.
PURGE OF JEWS FROM U.S. GOVERNMENT DEMANDED: "Pollard Should  Be Only the Beginning," NS, Mar. 16, 1987.
JEWS AS POLITICAL AGENTS, NOT JUST SPIES: "Register the Zionist Lobby  as Foreign Agents!
," NS, Sept. 5, 1978.
ISRAEL "MAIN INTERMEDIARY" IN STEALING SECRETS FOR SOVIETS:  "Pollard Talks: Mossad Agents in U.S. Govt.," NS, June 16, 1986.
LAROUCHIANS DENIGRATE THE HOLOCAUST: LHL, "New Pamphlet to  Document Cult Origins of Zionism," NS, Dec. 8, 1978; Helga Zepp-LaRouche,  "The Zionists' Holocaust Today," NS, Jan. 26, 1979; Carol White, "Will There Be  a Next Generation?
," NS, Sept. 15, 1978.
SOOBZOKOV DEFENDED: "Who Is Tscherim Soobzokov, and Who Wants Him  Dead?
," NS, Aug. 26, 1985; "Soobzokov Dies; Blood on Hands of FBI, ADL," NS,  Sept. 13, 1985.
WALDHEIM SUPPORTED: "LaRouche Calls Waldheim Affair 'Gigantic Hoax,'"  EIR, June20, 1986.
COMMENTS ON BITBURG: "Victory in Germany," NS, May 13, 1985; "The  Shocking Truth about Simon Wiesenthal," EIR, May 14, 1985.
ATTACK ON KISSINGER: LHL, Kissinger: The Politics of Faggotry, NCLC  leaflet, Aug. 3, 1982.
SAYS HOMOSEXUALITY WAS "ORGANIZED" BY THE OLIGARCHY: LHL,  "The End of the Age of Aquarius?
," EIR, Jan. 1 0, 1 986.
ALLEGES THAT "SHYLOCKS" ARE BLOCKING ACTION AGAINST AIDS: LHL,  "Baker Learns Lesson of Merchants of Venice," NS, Oct. 28, 1985.
HITLER ON SYPHILIS: l\/lein Kampf, trans.
Ralph Manheim (Boston: Houghton  Mifflin, 1943), pp. 246-57   AIDS THE SPRINGBOARD FOR A NEW NATIONALISM: "New Solidarity Hits  100,000 Subscriptions," NS, Aug. 22, 1986.
HANGING AND BURNING SUGGESTED: LHL, "The End of the Age of  Aquarius?
," pp. 40-41.
GARY BAUER'S VIEWS ON OUARANTINE: "How to Make America Safe for  Families," interview.
New York Newsday, Aug. 19, 1987.
LAROUCHE COMMENTS ON GAY-BASHING: LHL, "Teenage Gangs'  Lynchings of Gays Is Foreseen Soon," NS, Feb. 9, 1987.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN   LAROUCHIAN POLICY OF NAMING NAMES, SUCH AS KISSINGER: "A War-  winning Strategy," NS, Mar. 21, 1978.
THE "ZIONIST-BRITISH ORGANISM": "Register the Zionist Lobby as Foreign  Agents!
," NS, Sept. 5, 1978.
REVIEW OF THE WHITE HOUSE YEARS: LHL, "Henry Kissinger as a Novelist,"  EIR, Nov. 4, 1980.
KISSINGER'S MASTERS "FAR WORSE THAN HITLER": LHL, The Pestilence of  Usury, NDPC pamphlet, 1981.
LEADING NEO-NAZI PRAISES LAROUCHE'S ANTI-KISSINGER CAMPAIGN:  Robert Miles, From the Mountain (newsletter), May-June 1984, p. 5.
KISSINGER WATCH ANNOUNCED; AIM IS "CONTROLLED AVERSIVE  ENVIRONMENT": Mark Burdman, "Dr. K.'s Career Takes a Turn for the Worse,"  EIR, Jan. 4, 1983.
SURVEILLANCE, PRANKS, AND DEMONSTRATIONS: "The Growing  Tribulations of Henry Kissinger," NS, Nov. 18, 1982; "From Kissinger's  Appointment Book," NS, Nov. 12, 1982; "Does Henry Kissinger Have AIDS, at  60?
," NS, June 6, 1983; "Does Dr. Henry Kissinger Still Exist?
," NS, June 20,  1 983; "Henry K. Hops a Catering Truck to Flee Protest," New York Post, Aug. 21 ,  1982; "Briefly," EIR, Nov. 2, 1982; "'Kissinger-Never Again,'" NS, Sept. 26, 1983.
THE ULTIMATE SMEAR: LHL, Kissinger: The Politics of Faggotry, NCLC leaflet,  Aug. 3, 1982; "LaRouche Challenges Kissinger to Sue Him," EIR, Aug. 17, 1982.
KISSINGER INFLUENCE IN WASHINGTON ATTACKED: "Kissinger Behind  White House Purge," NS, Oct. 21, 1983; Kissinger's Drive to Take Over the  Reagan Administration, EIR special report, 1983; "Want to Save Lives?
Bury  Kissinger!
," NS, June 28, 1985.
DEATH WISH FOR KISSINGER: "Briefly," EIR, July 6, 1982; Mark Burdman, "Dr.  K.'s Career Takes a Turn for the Worse"; "Is Henry Going off the Deep End?
,"  NS, June 10, 1983; "Koestler Takes His Own Advice; Kissinger to Follow?
," NS,  Mar. 14, 1983.
ALLEGED CAR-BOMB SUGGESTION: NBC Nightly News, Apr. 7, 1986.
KISSINGER AND ZIONISM: "Kissinger Mafia Pollute the Holy Land," NS, Mar.
18, 1983.
LAROUCHIANS BELIEVE KISSINGER IS OUT TO GET THEM: "Kissinger  Behind Attacks on LaRouche Organization," NS, Aug. 8, 1983; "Kissinger Seeks  Revenge," NS, July 13, 1984.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN   SCHERER'S VIEW OF LAROUCHE AS SPYMASTER: "Poison Weapons of  Psychological Terror Against Lyndon LaRouche," Brig. Gen. Paul-Albert Scherer,  EIR, Sept. 25, 1987.
EIR ON IRAN-CONTRA AFFAIR: Jeffrey Steinberg, "Billion-Dollar Arms Bust  Blows Israel's Khomeini Connection," EIR, May 9, 1986; Moscow's Secret  Weapon: Ariel Sharon and the Israeli Mafia, EIR special report.
Mar. 1, 1986.
LAROUCHE'S 1971 PLAN: LHL, "A Comparative Analysis of Intelligence  Services," EIR, Dec. 4, 1979.
SECRET FRENCH GOVERNMENT MEMO: Milton R. Copulos, The LaRouche  Network, Heritage Foundation report, July 19, 1984.
RATING OF WORLD SPOOK AGENCIES: LHL, "A Comparative Analysis of  Intelligence Services."
"PLODDING PHILISTINES," POETRY vs. SPOOKERY, OUARKS: LHL, "The  Day the Bomb Went Off," TC, Sept. 1 981 .
HACK NOVELISTS AS SPOOKS: LM, "Rockefeller's 'Fascism with a Democratic  Face,'"TC, Nov.-Dec.
1974.
REVIEW OF THE BOURNE IDENTITY: "The Robert Ludlum Formula," NS, June  18, 1981.
POE AN AGENT: LHL, Urgent Reforms of the Criminal-Justice System, NDPC  report, Feb. 9, 1981.
SIMILARITIES TO THE IPCRESS FILE: LM, "Rockefeller's 1984 Plot," TC, Feb.
1974, p. 8.
CHAPTER NINETEEN   THEORIES ON GANDHI SLAYING: EIR eds.
.
Derivative Assassination: Who  Killed Indira Ganc//?
/?
(New York: New Benjamin Franklin Publishing House,  1985).
VISIT TO TURKEY: "LaRouche Expresses Solidarity with NATO Ally Turkey,"  EIR, Aug. 14, 1987 (includes text of his Ankara press conference).
LAROUCHE ON MARCOS: Bob Grant Show, WABC-AM Radio, Oct. 8, 1986.
BLAMING MARCOS'S PROBLEMS ON THE ZIONISTS: Paul Goldstein,  "President Marcos and General Ver Wage War on Drugs and Terrorism," EIR,  Jan. 17, 1986.
POLAND: LHL, "Poland: A Trotskyite Insurrection?
," EIR, Sept. 16, 1980; "Don't  Meddle in Poland," NS, Jan. 25, 1982; "Poland Targeted by Terror Networks,"  EIR, Aug. 17, 1982.
GUATEMALA: Jeffrey Steinberg et al., Soviet Unconventional Warfare in Ibero-  America: The Case of Guatemala, EIR special report, Aug. 15, 1985.
SOUTH AFRICA, MID-1980S: "The Fraud of the New Anti-Apartheid Drive," EIR,  Jan. 8, 1985; "Botha: 'Apartheid Is Outdated, and We Have Outgrown It,'" EIR,  Feb. 14, 1986; "So.
Africa Strikes at ANC Terrorists," EIR, May 30, 1986; "South  Africa's Great Task: A 'Grand Design' for All of Africa," EIR, June 20, 1986.
NCLC ASPIRES TO AN ALLIANCE WITH THE BROEDERBOND: "The  Rembrandt Factor," NCLC internal document, Oct. 19, 1977; "Interim Report on  Humanist and Pro-Development Tendencies in South Africa," NCLC internal  document, Jan. 19, 1978.
PROMOTING SOUTH AFRICA'S INTERESTS: Peace Through Development in  Southern Africa, TC special report, 1978; "Summary of South Africa's Economic  Potential for Development," NCLC internal document, late 1970s.
PLANS FOR SCIENTIFIC INTELLIGENCE GATHERING: LM, "Functions of the  Science Section," ICLC internal document, Jan. 4, 1975.
INDIRECT MONITORING BY GOVERNMENT: LHL, "Security: KGB Footprints  Around Computron," ICLC internal document, Jan. 23, 1981.
GOLDSTEIN WORRIES ABOUT INCIDENT IN SOVIET UNION: "Background  Profile on KGB Connection," NCLC security memo, Jan. 19, 1981.
BREZHNEV OBITUARY: "Leonid Brezhnev (1906-82): Nation Builder," NS, Nov.
18, 1982.
CHAPTER TWENTY   FASCISM REOUIRES HIGH-LEVEL SPONSORS: LM, "The Conceptual History  of the Labor Committees," TC, Oct. 1974, p. 25.
CRITICIZES CUTBACKS AT LANGLEY: LHL, "In Defense of the Central  Intelligence Agency," NS, Dec. 1, 1978.
URGES A PARALLEL ORGANIZATION: LHL, "The CIA~Only a Caretaker  Force," EIR, Oct. 10, 1978.
URGES INCREASED AUTHORITY FOR CIA: LHL, The Case of Walter  L/ppmann (New York: Campaigner Publications, 1977), pp. 178-80.
DEPOSITION OFJEFFREY STEINBERG: June 6, 1984, LaRouche v. NBC, U.S.  District Court, Eastern District of Virginia, Civ.
Docket No. 84-01 36-A.
BARDWELL ON NCLC'S ALLEGED GOVERNMENT CONNECTIONS: Steve  Bardwell, "Third Rome Hypothesis," ICLC internal document, Jan. 13, 1984.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE   FRANKHOUSER'S 1975 TRIAL: U.S.A. v. Roy Frankhouser, U.S. District Court,  Philadelphia, Crim.
Docket No. 74-1 01 --see esp.
testimony of Edward N. Slamon  and his ATF memoranda filed with the court; "Informer's Trial: He Says Uncle  Sam Was His Partner in Crime," Washington Star, Sept. 15, 1975; "How  Klansman Became a U.S. Agent," Philadelphia Inquirer, July 13, 1975.
FRANKHOUSER'S DECEPTION OF THE NCLC: U.S.A. v.
The LaRouche  Campaign etal., U.S. District Court, Massachusetts, Crim.
Docket No. 86-323-K,  Proffer Pursuant to the Classified Information Procedures Act, Aug. 1987; John  Mintz, "Sifting the Truth from Informers on LaRouche," Washington Post, Oct. 26,  1986.
BARDWELL'S SKEPTICISM: Steve Bardwell, "Third Rome Hypothesis," ICLC  internal document, Jan. 13, 1984.
PICK'S ALLEGATION ABOUT GOLDSTEIN: NBC Nightly News, Apr. 7, 1986.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO   STALIN AND TROTSKY ARTICLES: LHL, "The Ouestion of Stalinism Today,"  TC, Nov. 1975; LM and K. Ghandi, "The Passion and Second Coming of L.D.  Trotsky," TC, Summer 1974.
LAROUCHE ON THE POTENTIAL EXPLOSIVENESS OF HIS CIA  CONNECTION: LHL, "Woodward's Book on Casey: A Blend of Fact and Fiction,"  EIR, Oct. 16, 1987.
JUDGE ROBERT KEETON RULES ON CIA DEFENSE AND THE EMERSON  PROBLEM: U.S.A. v.
The LaRouche Campaign etal., U.S. District Court,  Massachusetts, Crim.
Docket No. 86-323-K, Memorandum and Order, Apr. 8,  1988.
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE   AGENT PROFILES: LM, "Psychological Profile of a Model CIA Agent," NCLC  internal document, Aug. 19, 1974.
HAMERMAN DEFINES SECURITY'S MISSION: Warren Hamerman, "What Are  the Labor Committees and the Labor Parties?
," in l-low the Labor Party Is  Organized to Win, USLP pamphlet, 1976.
"ANTI-SEMITIC JEWS": Howard Blum and Paul L. Montgomery, "One Man  Leads U.S. Labor Party on Its Erratic Path," New York Times, Oct. 8, 1979.
CHARLES TATE'S TESTIMONY: USA v. Roy Frankhouser, U.S. District Court,  Massachusetts, Crim.
Docket No. 86-323-K, Nov. 2-4, 1987.
NEW HAMPSHIRE "COVER": "LaRouche Says His Supporters Take Covert  Roles in Campaign," New York Times, Feb. 1 6, 1 980.
CANON WEST: "Knight of Malta Admits Campaign Against USLP," NS, Dec. 12,  1978.
MASOUERADING AS JOURNALISTS: Patricia Lynch, "Is Lyndon LaRouche  Using Your Name?
," Columbia Journalism Review, Mar./Apr. 1985.
NEW HAMPSHIRE "TARGET LIST": "Harassing Telephone Calls Linked to  Campaign in New Hampshire," New York Times, Mar. 1 , 1 980.
SMEARS AND OTHER HARASSMENT OF JOURNALISTS: John Mintz, "Critics  of LaRouche Group Hassled, Ex-Associates Say," Washington Post, Jan. 14,  1985.
DEPOSITION OF JEFFREY STEINBERG: June 6, 1984, LaRouche v. NBC,  U.S. District Court, Eastern District of Virginia, Civ.
Docket No. 84-01 36-A.
DEAD CATS: Transcript of NBC First Camera, Mar. 4, 1984.
PLANS FOR HARASSING ADL: "Security-Legal Memorandum: NDPC-ADL  Counteroperations-Make the ADL Pay Everywhere," NCLC internal document.
Mar. 7, 1984.
EGAN'S TESTIMONY: Bond hearing of Jeffrey and Michelle Steinberg, Oct. 9,  1986, USA V. Jeffrey Steinberg et al., U.S. District Court, Massachusetts, Crim.
Docket No. 86-323-K; Violation No. 86-1379-M (Alexandria, Va.).
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR   MEETINGS WITH POLICE IN PACIFIC NORTHWEST: "'Radical' Group Spies  on Left," Seattle Sun, Oct. 27, 1976.
SURGICAL ACTION: LHL, U.S. Labor Party Security Services (sales brochure),  July 15, 1978.
NCLC'S LAW ENFORCEMENT PHILOSOPHY: "Two Approaches to the Law  Enforcement Crisis," EIR, Apr. 14, 1981.
DEFENDING THE LOS ANGELES PDID: "The Conspiracy to Destroy Law  Enforcement: The Case of the LAPD," Investigative Leads, 1980.
NCLC ADMITS IT COOPERATES WITH POLICE: "Plaintiffs Memorandum in  Support of Motion to Enjoin Release," LaRouche v. Webster, U.S. District Court,  Southern District of New York, 75 Civ.
6010, 1978.
CLAMSHELL ALLIANCE: "Two in Labor Party Cited as Police Source," Concord  Monitor, June 9, 1977; "Strange Bedfellows: Thomson and USLP," Boston  Phoenix, June 14, 1977.
FBI SAYS REPORTS ARE "FABRICATED": Edward Spannaus, "The  Documentary History of FBI Operations Against Lyndon LaRouche and the  NCLC," Part III, NS, July 18, 1983 (quotes from FBI documents received under  FOIA).
FIGHTING THE COUNTERCULTURE: "Cleaning Up the Filth," NS, June 25,  1981; LHL, Special Anti-terrorist Information Report, NSIPS, May 10, 1979, p. 11.
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE   WILLIAM BUNDY OUOTED: Howard Blum and Paul L. Montgomery, "U.S. Labor  Party: Cult Surrounded by Controversy," New York Times, Oct, 7, 1979.
LEVY AND NCLC: Transcript of NCLC interview with Levy, Dec. 1 981 (NCLC  internal document); "Mordechai Levy: The Profile of Mossad Hit Teams," in  Moscow's Secret Weapon: Ariel Sharon and the Israeli Mafia, EIR special report,  Mar. 1, 1986.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX   DUPONT'S WAR AGAINST ROY COHN: Now East, July and Dec. 1980;  "Profiles of the Times," Oct. 24, 1982; Nicholas von Hoffman, Citizen Cohn (New  York: Doubleday, 1988); People v. Dupont, New York State Supreme Court, New  York County, Crim.
Docket No. 4995/80.
ROGER STONE'S LETTER: "Judge Releases Cohn Foe," Village Voice, Nov.
25, 1981.
NCLC'S REACTION TO MEDIA'S OUTRAGE: "Is N.Y. Times Hanging Roy Cohn  Out to Dry?
," NS, Nov. 5, 1982.
ATTACKS ON MORGENTHAU: Is the District Attorney the Biggest Crook in  Town?
, NCLC leaflet, 1 982; "Is Morgenthau a Terrorist Sympathizer or Just His     Wife?
," NS, Dec. 6, 1982; "NCLC Motion Rattles 'Get LaRouclie' Prosecutor,"  NS, Dec. 10, 1982.
ATTEMPTS TO INTIMIDATE ABRAMS' OFFICE: "Homosexual Coven Runs  N.Y. Attorney General's Office," NS, Aug. 4, 1986; "Roy Cohn's Last Vendetta:  Alliance with the Dope Lobby," NS, Aug. 11,1 986.
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN   PURLOINED LETTER: LHL, "A Machiavellian Solution for Israel," TC, Mar. 1978,  p. 8.
ROLE OF DECEPTION AND CONCEALMENT IN HISTORY AND  PHILOSOPHY: LHL, "The Secrets Known Only to the Inner Elites," TC, May-  June 1978; LHL, "Wall Street's Un-reformed Drunks," NS, Mar. 7, 1978; LHL,  "What Is a Humanist Academy?
," TC, Sept.-Oct.
1978; LHL, "A Machiavellian  Solution for Israel."
"NOT NECESSARY TO CALL ONESELF A FASCIST TO BE A FASCIST": LHL,  "Solving the Machiavellian Problem Today," NS, July 7, 1978.
AVOIDING "MORAL SHOCK": "Machiavelli's Notebook: More Crimes Covered  Up by Euphemisms," New York-New Jersey Prosecutor (NCLC regional  newspaper), Sept. 29, 1986.
WORD GAMES: LHL, The Case of Walter Lippmann (New York: Campaigner  Publications, 1977).
TWISTING CUSTOMARY MEANINGS OF WORDS: LHL, Lippmann, p. 76.
IRONY AND PUNNING: LHL, Lippmann, pp. 76-77.
"NOMINALIST" PUNS: LHL, Lippmann, pp. 54, 69, 85.
DISLIKE OF OCCAM: LHL, Lippmann, p. 54.
GERMAN RIGHTIST DECEPTIONS: Kurt P. Tauber, Beyond Eagle and  Swastika: German Nationalism Since 1945, 2 vols.
(Middletown, Conn.:  Wesleyan University Press, 1967).
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT   ALLEGED "KERNEL of TRUTH" IN THE PROTOCOLS: LHL, "New Pamphlet to  Document Cult Origins of Zionism," NS, Dec. 8, 1978.
CONSPIRACY THEORY OF OLIGARCHS VERSUS HUMANISTS: LHL, "The  Secrets Known Only to the Inner Elites," TC, May-June 1978.
ATLANTIS: LHL, "The New Outline of History," NS, Feb. 9, 1979; LHL, "The  Truth Concerning Pre-Christian Cultures," NS, Mar. 23, 1979; LHL, "Beneath the  Waters of Chappaquiddick," Part II, NS, Jan. 26, 1979.
OLIGARCHS WROTE OLD TESTAMENT: LHL, "Solving the Machiavellian  Problem Today," NS.
July 7, 1978.
THE EVIL PERSIANS: LHL, "The Secrets Known Only to the Inner Elites," pp.
16-20.
ALLEGED JEWISH POWER IN ANCIENT BABYLON AND PERSIA: Houston  Stewart Chamberlain, Foundations of the Nineteenth Century, Vol.
I (New York:  Howard Fertig [repr.]
, 1968), pp. 458-63; Oswald Spengler, The Decline of the  West, Vol.
II (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1928), p. 209.
EVIL DIONYSIAN CULTS: LHL, "What Is a Humanist Academy?
," TC, Sept.-Oct.
1978; LHL, "The Secrets Known Only to the Inner Elites," pp. 20-24.
ISIS AND MODERN ISRAEL: Mark Burdman, "How Britain's Biggest Racists  Created Zionism," TC, Dec. 1978, pp. 38-39.
ROSENBERG'S VIEW OF ANCIENT CULTS: Alfred Rosenberg, The Myth of the  Twentieth Century {Torrance, Calif.: Noontide Press, 1982); Dionysios: p. 17;  Isis: pp. 149, 235.
ROLE OF PIERLIONI FAMILY AND OTHER ROMAN BANKERS IN MEDIEVAL  EUROPE: LHL, "The Secrets Known Only to the Inner Elites," pp. 32-33; LHL,  "Two Global Conspiracies," NS, Nov. 18, 1977.
THE OLD MAN OF THE MOUNTAIN: LHL, "How to Analyze and Uproot  International Terrorism," NS, Feb. 17, 1978.
FREDERICK BARBAROSSA: "The German Constitutional State and Terrorism,"  manifesto of the European Labor Party, TC, Feb. 1978, pp. 36-37.
BEMOANING OF RACIAL DECLINE: LHL, "The Looming Extinction of the 'White  Race,'" EIR, May 21, 1985.
ATLANTIS AND THE ARYAN RACE: LHL, "The New Outline of History";  Rosenberg, The Myth of the Twentieth Century, pp. 4-5; LHL, The Toynbee  Factor in British Grand Strategy, EIR special report, 1982.
LAROUCHE ON STRUGGLE BETWEEN INDUSTRIAL AND LOAN CAPITAL:  LM, Dialectical Economics {Lex\ng\on, Mass.: D. C. Heath, 1975).
SPENGLER'S STRUGGLE OF THE TWO ELITES: The Decline of the West, Vol.
II, p. 506.
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE   NAZI OBSESSION WITH A BRITISH-JEWISH CONSPIRACY: Mein Kampf  (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1943), p. 637; Himmler quoted in Bradley F. Smith,  Heinrich Himmler: A Nazi in the Making, 1900-1926 (Stanford, Calif.: Hoover  Institution Press, 1971), p. 166; Alfred Rosenberg, The Myth of the Twentieth  Century {Torrance, Calif.: Noontide Press, 1982), p. 414; World-Battle quoted in  Peter Viereck, Meta-Politics: The Roots of the Nazi Mind {He^N York: Capricorn  Books, 1965), pp. 307-8; Joseph Goebbels, The Goebbels Diaries, ed.
and trans.
Louis P. Lochner (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1948), pp. 285-86 (entry for  Dec. 19, 1942).
POPULIST OBSESSION WITH BRITISH-JEWISH PLOT: Richard Hofstadter,  The Age of Reform (New York: Vintage, 1955), pp. 70-93.
LAROUCHE'S APPARENT SOURCE FOR HIS THEORIES ABOUT THE  "BRITISH": "Cincinnatus," War!
War!
War!
, 3d ed.
(Metairie, Louisiana: Sons of  Liberty, 1984).
"BRITISH" DEFINED AS BEING IDENTICAL WITH WEALTHY BRITISH JEWS:  LHL, The Case of Walter Lippmann (New York: Campaigner Publications, 1977),  p. 13; LHL, "Anti-Dirigism Is British Tory Propaganda," NS, Feb. 3, 1978.
STAR OF DAVID ILLUSTRATION: LHL, "Mickey Mouse & Pluto Move to  Washington," NS, Oct. 17, 1978.
CONSPIRACY OF COSMOPOLITAN FAMILIES: LHL, "How to Analyze and  Uproot International Terrorism," NS, Feb. 17, 1978.
KICK THE BRITISH OUT OF WASHINGTON: LHL, "The Fitness to Command,"  NS, Feb. 14, 1978.
"ZIONIST-BRITISH ORGANISM": "Register the Zionist Lobby as Foreign  Agents!
," NS, Sept. 5, 1978.
ROTHSCHILDS CONTROL BRITAIN: Christopher R. White, The Noble Family  TC special report, 1978, p. 14.
CHAPTER THIRTY     RACIAL DOCTRINES: LM, Dialectical Economics {Lex\ng{on, Mass.: D. C.  Heath, 1 975), pp. 90-91 , 457; LHL, "The Secrets Known Only to the Inner Elites,"  TC, May-June 1978, p. 50.
THE HIGHER REALITY THE BRITISH CANT COMPREHEND: "The Death of  Aldo Moro: The Time for Justice Has Come," Part II, NS, May 16, 1978.
PARASITE AND HOST: LHL, "The Secrets Known Only to the Inner Elites," p.  64.
BRITISH A "LOWER ORDER OF MENTALITY": LHL, "The Death of Aldo Moro:  The Time for Justice Has Come," Part II.
BRITISH A "PACK OF ANIMALS": LHL, "That Zoo Called The House of Lords,'"  NS, Dec. 29, 1978.
AVOWED ENEMIES OF HUMAN SPECIES: LHL, "How to Analyze and Uproot  International Terrorism," NS, Feb. 17, 1978.
ALLEGED "SENSUAL APPETITES": LHL, "The Truth Concerning Pre-Christian  Cultures," NS, Mar. 23, 1979.
BRITISH AN ALIEN SPECIES: Christopher R. White, The Noble Family, TC  special report, 1 978, pp. 4,11.
"POTENTIAL DESTROYER" OF THE OLIGARCHS: LHL, "The Elite That Can't  Think Straight," EIR, Oct. 17, 1978, p. 56.
DESTROY THE BRITISH SO HUMANITY MIGHT LIVE: White, The Noble  Family, p. 31.
CHINESE: LM, "What Happened to Integration?
," TC, Aug. 1975, p. 26.
AMERICAN BLACKS: LHL, The Case of Walter Lippmann (New York:  Campaigner Publications, 1977), p. 144.
PUERTO RICANS: LM, "What Happened to Integration?
," p. 40; LM, "The  Sexual Impotence of the Puerto Rican Socialist Party," TC, Nov. 1973.
ITALIANS AND IRISH: LM, "The Case of Ludwig Feuerbach," TC, Dec. 1973, pp.
32-33.
TRIBAL PEOPLES: LHL, "The Truth Concerning Pre-Christian Cultures."
ANNEXATION OF NATIVE AMERICAN AND MEXICAN TERRITORY: LHL,  Lippmann, p. 30.
RUSSIANS AS SUBHUMANS: LHL, "Ivan Grozny, Timur Timofeev Is a Boyar,"  NS.
May 30, 1978.
MOUNT ATHOS: "Bomb the 'Holy Mountain,'" EIR, Feb. 21 , 1 986.
ALLEGED ULTIMATE GOAL OF LAROUCHE'S LIFE: LHL, The Power of  Reason (New York: New Benjamin Franklin Publishing House, 1979), p. 194.
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE   TYCOON THEORY: LHL, "Shoe Data Processing Comes of Age," undated  report.
CRIMINAL CONDITIONING THEORY: LHL, "How to Profile the Terrorist  Infrastructure," EIR, Sept. 26, 1978.
CONFRONTATIONAL FUNDRAISING TACTICS: Howard Blum and Paul L.  Montgomery, "U.S. Labor Party: Cult Surrounded by Controversy."
New York  Times, Oct. 7, 1979.
LAROUCHE ANALYZES LABOR COSTS: LHL, "Economic-Valuation Budgetary  Standards," ICLC internal document, Jan. 15, 1981.
KALIMTGIS THREATENS TO GO BEFORE A GRAND JURY: Konstandinos  Kalimtgis, "Open Letter to Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr.," Jan. 26, 1981.
COMPUTRON BANKRUPTCY: In the Matter of Computron, U.S. Bankruptcy  Court, Southern District of New York, Docket No. 81 -B-1 04-77.
LAROUCHE ON PSYCHOLOGICAL BURNOUT: LHL, "Organizational Aspects  of Financial Management," NCLC internal document, July 25, 1 981 .
ALLEGED FINANCIAL SCAMS DURING 1980 CAMPAIGN: Bank Bumiputra  Malaysia Berhad v. D. Stephen Pepper, New York State Supreme Court, County  of New York, Civ.
Docket No. 1 0750-81 ; John J. Parker et al. v. Pepper Fine Arts  etai, New York State Supreme Court, New York County, Civ.
Docket No. 12046-  84.
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO   REPORT ON FINANCIAL STRUCTURE: How the Labor Party Is Organized to  Win, NCLC/USLP pamphlet, 1976.
"PROPRIETARY" RELATIONSHIP, SHADOWS, FOOTPRINTS: LHL, What Are  the Labor Committees Today?
, ICLC pamphlet, Dec. 1979.
LERNER'S ALLEGATIONS: Affidavit of Eric Lerner, IVIay 29, 1979, Gilbertson v.  Lerner, New York State Supreme Court, New York County, Civ.
Docket No.
09564-79.
NCLC'S FINANCES GO "UNDERGROUND": "Financial Warfare Against the  NCLC, Report No. 1," NCLC internal document, Sept. 23, 1978.
WERTZ'S POEMS: "The Cathedrals," NS, Nov. 25, 1985; "From the Sling of  David," NS, Dec. 20, 1985; "Sling of David," NS, Dec. 27, 1985.
THE "ART" OF CREDIT-CARD FRAUD: Complaint and Jury Demand, July 28,  1 986, First Fidelity Banl< v. LaRouctie et al., U.S. District Court, New Jersey, Civ.
Docket No. 86-2938.
CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE   MARGARET BEYNEN CASE: Declaration of Margaret Beynen, Oct. 9, 1986,  U.S. District Court, Northern District of California, Civil Docket No. 86-5820.
RIP-OFFS OF ELDERLY, AN OVERVIEW: CBS's West 57th (news program),  Oct. 10, 1987.
ELIZABETH ROSE TRANSFORMED INTO HEROINE: "Elizabeth Rose Blasts  'Reign of Terror' Against Elderly in U.S.," NS, Nov. 7.
1986; "Elizabeth Rose  Inspires Audiences," NS, Dec. 19, 1986; "Patriotic 84-Year-Old Begins Tour for  Seniors' Rights," NS, Nov. 24, 1986.
HELGA ON FINANCIAL "LOGISTICS": Helga Zepp-LaRouche, ICLC daily  briefing, Aug. 22, 1986.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR   LAROUCHE'S THEORY OF LINKS BETWEEN SPOOKS AND CROOKS: LHL,  Tlie Case of Walter Lippmann (New York: Campaigner Publications, 1977), pp.
134-35.
CIARDELLI'S DRUG CONNECTION: Mike Royko, "They Hate Drug Pushers,  But...," Chicago Tribune, Apr. 21 , 1 986.
NCLC ANALYSIS OF THE DRUG TRAFFIC: Konstandinos Kalimtgis et al..
Dope, Inc.: Britain's Opium War Against the U.S. (New York: New Benjamin  Franklin Publishing House, 1978).
NCLC THEORIES ON MONEY LAUNDERING: David Goldman, "What Does the  NSA Know About Dirty Money?
," NS, Aug. 21 , 1 979.
THE ROVING DECIMAL POINT: Bank of Nova Scotia v. NCLC, New York State  Supreme Court, New York County, Civ.
Docket No. 02829-77; "The Drug Banks  Heist $350,000 from LaRouche Organization," NS, Nov. 7, 1978.
CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE   LAROUCHIAN DEALINGS WITH TEAMSTERS: "LaRouche Cult Linked to  Teamsters," Our Town, Dec. 23, 1979, and "Teamsters for LaRouche," Our  Town, Jan. 27, 1980; Douglas Foster, "Teamster Madness," Mother Jones, Jan.
1982.
NCLC ARTICLES GLORIFYING VIOLENCE: "Teamsters Debate PROD," NS,  Aug. 11, 1978; "Ken Paff--Khomeini's Man in U.S. Labor Movement," NS, Feb. 9,  1981.
ANTI-SEMITISM: LHL, "Jack Anderson and the Gang That Killed Hoffa," in The  Gang That Killed Hoffa, TC special report, 1978.
BACKGROUND ON McMASTER: Dan E. Moldea, The Hoffa Wars (New York:  Paddington Press, 1978).
LAROUCHE PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN AND THE TEAMSTERS: "The Big Lie  Bites Back," Convoy, July-Aug.
1979; LHL, "Open Letter to IBT Pres.  Fitzsimmons," and TCELP, "Teamster Committee: 'No Time to Be Scared,'" NS,  Extra, June 22, 1979; "IBT Denies Supporting U.S. Labor Party Candidates,"  International Teamster, July 1979.
NCLC CALLS FOR FIGHT AGAINST AFL-CIO ZIONISTS: NS, Sept. 8 and Sept.
26, 1978.
CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX   "HAVE A HUNDRED-DOLLAR BILL": LHL, "Top-Level Dope, Inc.
Control of  Dalto Conclusively Proven," ICLC internal document, Nov. 4, 1981.
MAYER MORGANROTH'S BACKGROUND: "Florida Lawyer's Role in Teamster  Loans Being Investigated by Justice Department," Wall Street Journal, Nov. 14,  1977; Dan E. Moldea, The Hoffa Wars (New York: Paddington Press, 1978).
CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN   GOOD AND BAD MOBSTERS: LHL, "The Mafia in U.S. Life," ICLC internal  document, Nov. 1, 1981.
ANTI-BRILAB LITERATURE: The Justice Department Stands Trial, NDPC  pamphlet, 1981 ; Brilab-Abscam: Union-Busting in America, Committee Against  Brilab and Abscam pamphlet, 1980.
PROVENZANO FAMILY DEFENDED: NS, Apr. 16, 1981; May 7, 1981; May 21,  1981.
FRANK SHEERAN DEFENDED: NS, Apr. 13, 1981; Apr. 16, 1981; May 18,  1981.
INTERVIEW WITH ORRIN HATCH: "Senator Hatch Talks About Brilab  Approach," EIR, Mar. 10, 1981.
CABA IN HOUSTON: "Committee Against Brilab, Abscam: Controversy Swirling  Around Group's Tactics in Fighting 'Conspiracy,'" Houston Post, Dec. 7, 1980.
ALLEGED "ARRAY OF MAFIOSO CONNECTIONS": "FBI Cointelpro Against  LaRouche on Trial in Detroit," NS, Jan. 24, 1986.
DETROIT SPLIT: Joe Conason, "Is LaRouche's Cult Collapsing?
," Village Voice,  Nov. 11, 1981.
"DOPE-SOAKED TEETH": "Max Fisher-United Brands Behind Detroit-Centered  Operation," ICLC internal document, Nov. 5, 1981.
"'MAFIA VIOLENCE' AURA": LHL, "Top-Level Dope, Inc.
Control of Dalto  Conclusively Proven," ICLC internal document, Nov. 4, 1981.
THREATS TO DALTO: "Dalto May Be Killed by Mafia Soon," ICLC internal  document, Nov. 1, 1981.
CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT   ANNOYANCE AT IBT LEADERSHIP: "Teamster Stupidity," NS, Jan. 25, 1982.
SUPPORT FOR NORIEGA: Wliite Paper on tlie Panama Crisis: Wlio's Out to  Destabilize the U.S. Ally, and Why, EIR special report, 1986; "State Department  Plots with Nazis to Destroy Panama," EIR, Mar. 21, 1986; "U.S. Caught Backing  Mob 'Democrats' in Panama," EIR, June 27, 1986.
NORIEGA SPEECH: Manuel Noriega, "The Military's Role in Securing  Democracy," EIR, Mar. 7, 1986.
ATTITUDE TO SPADAFORA MURDER: "From the Editor," EIR, Mar. 7, 1986.
BLANDON TESTIMONY: Hearing on Drugs, Law Enforcement and Foreign  Policy: Panama, U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, Subcommittee on  Terrorism, Narcotics and International Operations, Feb. 9, 1988.
PARNTHER SPEAKS AT LAROUCHIAN GATHERING: "International Panel  Blasts Persecution of LaRouche," EIR, Sept. 18, 1987 (photo of Parnther at this  event, EIR, Sept. 25, 1987, p. 37).
EIR'S RESPONSE TO BLANDON TESTIMONY: "Jose Blandon Paid to Lie,"  EIR, Feb. 19, 1988.