LaRouche Enters Not Guilty Plea in a Fraud Case
AP
Published: October 18, 1988
ALEXANDRIA, Va., Oct. 17— Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., the political extremist, and six co-defendants pleaded not guilty today to Federal charges of fraud and conspiracy in connection with what the authorities said was a scheme to raise money.
At an arraignment Mr. LaRouche and his associates promised to return to court for trial Nov. 21 and for a hearing on a motion Nov. 10.
Federal District Judge Albert V. Bryan Jr. sped the proceeding by saying he assumed that all the defendants were pleading not guilty and asking for a jury trial. Their lawyers nodded agreement.
At a news conference in Washington earlier today Mr. LaRouche called the indictment ''a heap of garbage'' and asserted: ''I'm certainly not guilty.'' 'Dirty Trick'
''This is purely a political stunt,'' said Mr. LaRouche, 66 years old, an independent candidate for President who is campaigning in 12 states and the District of Columbia. ''Nebulous charges never occur this close to an election except as a dirty trick.''
Mr. LaRouche was indicted Friday on 13 counts of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud and conspiracy to defraud the Internal Revenue Service. Conviction on all counts carries a possible prison term of 65 years and fines of $3.25 million.
Six of his associates also were charged and would face lesser sentences if convicted. The grand jury said the defendants had raised more than $34 million through loans to Mr. LaRouche's political and commercial groups from people around the country between 1983 and 1987 with no intention of repaying them.
The indictment said Mr. LaRouche conspired to defraud the I.R.S. by having his expenses paid by friends and groups associated with him. It added that he had not filed a federal income tax return since at least 1979.
United States Attorney Henry Hudson said Friday that Mr. LaRouche was being treated like any other citizen accused of a crime.
The seven defendants were all released on their own personal recognizance but pledged to pay $5,000 if they failed to appear for court dates.
Judge Bryan allowed them unlimited travel in the United States and abroad so long as they informed the court clerk in advance. Assistant United States Attorney Kent Robinson had objected to international travel but was overruled.
An earlier Federal trial of Mr. LaRouche and other associates in Boston ended in a mistrial because jurors objected to the length of the case. The Boston case is scheduled for retrial in January.
 