LaRouche supporter ruffles feathers on Thursday
by ELIZABETH SHEPHERD,  Vashon-Maury Island Beachcomber Staff 
Mar 18, 2010 at 4:49PM
A lone supporter of perennial presidential candidate and political activist Lyndon LaRouche visited Vashon on Thursday, on a mission to distribute leaflets and share his ideas with Islanders outside of Vashon's main post office.
Paul Glumaz, a balding middle-aged man whose booming voice carried a trace of an East Coast accent, set up a table festooned with pamplets and posters, one of which had the words "impeach now" emblazoned below a portrait of Pres. Barack Obama wearing a Hitler-style moustache.
As a strong breeze ruffled the political literature on the table, Glumaz laughed and described some of the hand gestures he'd seen from drivers of passing cars.
"I've been getting a lot of birds and some thumbs up," he said.
Glumaz described his trip to Vashon was part political mission, part tourism.
"I have a friend here, and he's going to show me around tonight," he explained.
Glumaz said that he was unaware that more than 80 percent of Islanders had voted for Obama.
"I didn't know it was such a stronghold," he said. "I thought it was more like 50-50."
One passerby, a man with a long blonde ponytail, asked Glumaz how he could display a poster that "defaced the face of our president," while another, a woman who said she had recently moved to the Island from Bellevue, said she didn't mind the image.
"I love that you're standing here," she told Glumaz.
Inside the post office, postal workers said they had received a steady stream of complaints about Glumaz's booth and had even called the sheriff, who told them that Glumaz wasn't breaking any laws.
Still, Glumaz's presence clearly irritated at least one of the postal workers.
"I wonder if he knows that Lyndon LaRouche was sentenced to jail for 15 years for mail fraud," she said, offering a reporter a thick sheaf of papers, which turned out to be a print out from the Web site Wikipedia, detailing LaRouche's criminal trials in the mid-1980s.
LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud and tax evasion in 1988, following state and federal investigations into his activities and those of his associates.
Since his release from prison, he has remained politically active, and in 2009, he compared Obama's proposals for health care reform to Hitler's euthanasia program.
A LaRouche poster of Obama-as-Hitler was at the center of an incident in Edmonds last year, when Henry Gasparian, a 70-year-old Holocaust survivor, was accused of disorderly conduct after he physically accosted two LaRouche supporters who were passing out fliers with the image.
Here on Vashon, the poster didn't result in fisticuffs, but a number of Islanders weren't shy about expressing their disapproval to Glumaz.
"Where are you from?" a woman asked in a low voice as she approached Glumaz's booth. "What are you doing on the Island?"
"I'm from a different part of the universe," Glumaz answered with a broad smile. "And I'm here to invade your space."
ELIZABETH SHEPHERD,  Vashon-Maury Island Beachcomber Staff 
arts@vashonbeachcomber.com	or 206-463-9195