LaRouche Trial Fact Sheet
The file below is from the Lincoln Legacy BBS (703)777-5987.
It is run by John Covici and has many LaRouche related text
files. The file below is found there compressed as TRIAL_FC.ZIP.
This has been previously posted to alt.conspiracy - apologies to
anyone seeing it twice.
-Steve
                            TEXT
The following is a fact sheet documenting the background to the
trial of Lyndon LaRouche at the Federal Court in Alexandria,
Virginia USA.
Prehistory
Oct. 6, 1986: Massive search and seizure operation by 400 FBI
agents and police of the Leesburg, Virginia offices of the
Executive Intelligence Review and the newspaper New Solidarity.
Indictments, based on findings of a Boston Grand Jury, are
issued to the LaRouche campaign organization and LaRouche-
associated companies, and against 10 LaRouche collaborators. (On
Dec. 16, 1987 three more LaRouche associates are indicted, and
then LaRouche himself on July 2, 1987.) The accusations are
"conspiracy to obstruct justice" and "credit card fraud."
Truckloads of documents are seized, supposedly to provide
additional documentation of the accusations. A second search
warrent mentions "[illegal] sale of stocks and bonds". For this
latter accusation, a Grand Jury in Loudon County Virginia
indicts, on Feb. 18, 1987, another 16 LaRouche associated
individuals and 5 companies.
Nov. 24, 1986: First press stories appear, in the Washington
Post and Loudon Times Mirror, referencing an Alexandria, Virgina
Grand Jury investigation (again using material seized in raid) of
alleged tax evasion by LaRouche and associated companies. These
investigations, like the ones in Loudon County, make use of the
huge mass of documents seized in the FBI raid.
Apr. 20, 1987: Alexandria, Virginia bankrupcy judge Bostetter
orders three companies (one is a scientific organization) to be
placed under involuntary supervision and forced to suspend their
activities.
May 1988: After a 6-month Boston trial, judge Robert Keeton
declares a mistrial, following serious errors by the prosecution.
The prosecution refused to disclose crucial evidence to the
defense. After the mistrial, a Boston newspaper published an
interview with one of the jurors, who stated that the jury, in
an informal vote, was unanimously in favor of acquitting the
defendants, because the prosecution could not prove its case and
had destroyed its credibility through its legal misconduct.
Oct. 14, 1988: Federal attorney Henry Hudson of Alexandria,
Virginia, announces that he is indicting LaRouche and six
associates for "conspiracy to commit mail fraud" and "conspiracy
to defraud the Internal Revenue Service."
The accused William Wertz, Edward Spannaus, Michael Billington,
Dennis Small, Paul Greenberg and Joyce Rubinstein are each
indicted on between 3 and 11 counts. LaRouche on the other hand
is indicted on a total of 13 counts. Count 13 charges him with
having conspired "with persons known and unknown to the Grand
Jury" in order to prevent the IRS from assessing and collecting
his taxes.
The other 12 counts charge the defendants with having devised "a
scheme and artifice to defraud and obtain money by false and
fraudulant pretenses, representations and promises... The policy
of the NCLC (a LaRouche-associated organisation) was not to repay
loans in accordance with the promises made to lenders; ...
between January 1984 and September 1986 the organisation never
established a system for making, and never made, routine payments
of promised principal and interest on loans in general." The
prosecution cited 11 individual cases in which creditors were
mailed written agreements. (For technical legal reasons, the main
accusations -- fraud and violation of loan contracts -- were
subsumed under the designation "mail fraud")
The accusations stand or fall with the basic claim, that the
National Caucus of Labor Committees (NCLC), a philosophical
association founded nearly 20 years ago, is in fact a criminal
conspiracy whose essential purpose is to enrich Lyndon LaRouche.
The political goals of this organisation--fighting drugs and
hunger, for a new just world economic order, for a strong western
defense, against the decay of westerm culture and for a cultural
and scientific renaissance--were considered side aspects of the
"conspiracy". 
Pretrial events
By setting a very short period between the indictment and trial
opening, Alexandria Judge Bryan created the preconditions for a
summary trial, in which the defendants were deprived of the
possibility of comprehensive defense.
Oct. 14, 1988: LaRouche's lawyers submit a legal challenge
against the indictment, on grounds that the indictment would
damage LaRouche's ongoing electoral campaign, and that it was
largely identical to that of the Boston trial, and therefore
violated the fundamental legal principle excluding "double
jeopardy" -- no one can be tried for the same accusation twice.
Judge Stanley Sporkin dismisses the challenge following a brief
oral hearing without having read the written motions.
October 17, 1988: Arraignment before Chief Judge Albert V.
Bryan. All defendants plead not guilty and move to shift the
proceedings to Boston, on the grounds of similar content of the
two cases. Bryant fixes a Nov. 10 deadline for submission of all
defense pre-trial motions and Nov. 21 for the trial. When even
the state prosecutor Robinson objects, Judge Bryan remarks that
90 percent of the defense motions would just come of a computer
and only three or four would be worth considering.
Oct. 21, 1988: Judge Bryan dismisses the motion to move the
trial to Boston, despite the fact that the circumstance of
"double jeopardy" is underlined by the presence of the Boston
prosecutors John Markham and Mark Rasch, who assist the deputy
prosecutor of Alexandria in the trial.
Oct. 28, 1988: Hearing of defense motion that the prosecution
must indicate all documents to be used as evidence for the
accusations. At this point, Judge Bryant admits that "we are
pushing the defendants a bit hard in this case in terms of time".
Nov. 4, 1988: The defense protests the hurried tempo of the trial
and the trial date, only five weeks after the indictment.
Defense Attorney Kenley Webster points out that he had only two
weeks to work on the case, while the prosecution had been working
on it for four years. Furthermore, since October 1986 defendants
had been deprived access to the more than two million documents
seized and available to the prosecution. Judge Bryan supports
the argument of prosecutor Kent Robinson, that most of the
defense attorneys had become familiar with the case already in
Boston. Motions to shift the trial and to delay trial date are
denied. The Judge also denies defense motion to separate
proceedings on the tax evasion count from the other, completely
different, counts.
Nov. 7, 1988: The Alexandria prosecution, represented by Boston
state attorney Markham as signer (!), moves that defendants
and their attorneys should not be allowed to mention harrassment
and financial warfare by government institutions as a reason for
non-payment of loans. The prosecution demands that no mention be
made of illegal investigations by the FBI, of documented
infiltration of the LaRouche organization by informants, or of
the involuntary bankruptcy proceedings brought against LaRouche-
associated companies by the government in April 1987. This demand
is particularly bizarre: the alleged conspiracy according to the
prosecution was supposed to have terminated on April 19, 1987,
one day before the involuntary bankruptcy proceeding.
The attorneys for Ed Spannaus and the other defendants submit an
Emergency Petition for Mandamus to the U.S. Court of Appeals in
Richmond, arguing that Judge Bryan be ordered to move the trial
to a later date.
In addition, the defense submits a Motion to release exculpatory
evidence. This includes information concerning agents and
informants infiltrated into LaRouche-associated organizations by
government agencies and government pressure applied to financial
supporters and banks carrying accounts of LaRouche organizations
and supporters.
Nov. 9, 1988: Defense submits a motion to suspend the trial on
grounds it is politically motivated and selectively directed
against LaRouche, while other politicians, for example Gary Hart,
would never consider repaying campaign debts of millions of
dollars.
Nov. 10, 1988: Judge Bryan dismisses the above and 26 of the 28
motions, and supports the prosecution's demands to limit scope of
the defense. Bryant claims that harrassment by government
agencies was irrelevant to the case in point. He denies the
defense the right to individually question the prospective jurors
or to submit a list of questions for jury selection.
By these actions Judge Bryan preprogrammed a guilty verdict
against the defendants. Limiting the defense meant that the true
political nature of the case, which had begun to emerge during
the Boston trial, would be excluded. Instead, attention was to be
given to the obscure conspiracy theory of the prosecution.
November 14: Refering to their Petition to the Richmond court,
the attorneys for the defense submit sworn personal oaths to the
effect that an adequate defense would be impossible under the
conditions set by Judge Bryan, a situation which would violate
the constitutional right to a fair trial.
At the same time, the defense submits a new motion against the
ruling of Judge Bryan requiring the defense to reveal its
strategy prior to the opening of the trial.
November 17: The Richmond Court of Appeals rejects the defense's
petition for a setting a later trial date.
November 18: Final deliberation before opening of the trial.
Judge Bryan rejects the defense motion asking that the
prosecution be ordered to submit a list of prosecutions
witnesses. The prosecution is only required to name a witness 24
hours before the witness is to appear in court. Judge Bryan also
dismisses the motion of November 14.
                        Jury "Selection"
On Nov. 21, after denial of further motions to suspend or delay
the trial, jury selection begins. This process, which took three
weeks in Boston, was now completed in less than three hours. Out
of the pool of 175 prospective jurors 46 were employees of the
U.S. government, including the Department of Justice (DOJ), the
FBI, the CIA, the IRS, the Secret Service, and government
departments. Even employees of law enforcement agencies, were only
excluded when they themselves admitted to being "biased." One of
them, a Secret Service Agent, was disqualified after he flashed
his badge and revealed that he himself had been involved in
investigations against LaRouche! After 145 candidates had been
excluded for cause the remaining 30 still included an employee of
the DOJ, an FBI employee, the wife of a former FBI consultant, a
government official working with the IRS, a Defense Intelligence
Agency employee with contacts to the CIA, a secretary of the Drug
Enforcement Agency, an employee of the Department of Labor, a
worker for the television company NBC which is known for its
hatred of LaRouche. Since the defense had only 9 veto rights,
there was no way to exclude all biased witnesses.