-------------------------------------------------------------------
                         F.A.C.T.Net, Inc.
         (Fight Against Coercive Tactics Network, Incorporated)
      a non-profit computer bulletin board and electronic library
            601 16th St. #C-217 Golden, Colorado 80401 USA
                          BBS 303 530-1942
                          FAX 303 530-2950
                       Office 303 473-0111
This document is part of an electronic lending library.  F.A.C.T.Net
does not sell documents, it only lends them according to the terms of
your library cardholder agreement with F.A.C.T.Net, Inc.
-------------------------------------------------------------------
                     CARD CATALOG ENTRY
-------------------------------------------------------------------
1 Indictment for Alleged Deprogramming Plan.  Lewis du Pont Smith,
Lyndon LaRouche, Edgar Newbold Smith, Donald Moore, Jr., Galen 
Kelley
    The father of du Pont fortune heir Lewis du Pont Smith, and 
two other men, one a former police officer,	the other 
a deprogrammer, were indicted by a federal grand jury in Alexandria 
in mid-October on charges that they planned to kidnap Smith 
and his wife and persuade them to give up their allegiance to 
jailed political extremist Lyndon LaRouche. The lawyer for Philadelphia 
socialite Newbold Smith, 66, said that his client intended to 
plead not guilty. "We are looking forward to our day in court," 
he said. "We firmly believe that when the facts come out he 
will be vindicated."
    Indicted along with Newbold Smith were Donald Moore, Jr., 
45, formerly a lieutenant in the Loudoun County (VA) Sheriff's 
Department; Galen Kelley, 45, a private investigator and self-described 
deprogrammer from Esopus, NY; attorney Robert "Biker Bob" Point, 
38, of South Amboy, NJ; and Angelo Russo, 45, of Newburgh, 
NY. The indictment alleges that Kelley and Russo paid an unnamed 
woman $200 to become a member of an Upper Derby (PA) health 
club frequented by Lewis Smith in order to learn where he lived, 
worked, and socialized. The indictment also detailed phone 
conversations among the accused planning the abduction. Moore 
is also charged with entering Lewis Smith's property to conduct 
surveillance in September. (From "Indictment accuses 5 of du 
Pont-heir plot," by Bill Ordine, Philadelphia Inquirer, 10/14/92, 
B4)
Acted Out of Love
    Edgar Newbold Smith, who has spent several years trying 
to free his son from LaRouche's influence,
says, "Everything I have done I've done sheerly out 
of love for Lewis Smith and nothing else, and I think that 
will become clear. I was very close to my son throughout his 
life, until he joined that organization." Legal sources familiar 
with the investigation say that attorney John Markham, the 
federal prosecutor in the 1988 conspiracy trial against LaRouche, 
will try to woo the jury by portraying his client as an adoring 
father desperate to recover his son.
    Smith told the Post that his son was transformed by his 
association with the LaRouche organization in the mid-1980s. 
"When Lewis is himself, he's one swell guy. He's got a heart 
about 10 feet high," Smith said. "But when he's in that organization, 
he's not himself anymore - unfortunately." Edgar Smith brought 
several court actions against Lewis in the 1980s after his 
son lent more than $200,000 to the LaRouche group and expressed 
little interest in recovering it, and the father persuaded 
a Pennsylvania judge to declare Lewis incompetent to manage 
his own funds. Nonetheless, Lewis Smith [who receives court-approved 
money from his late mother's estate] recently bought a $500,000 
house in suburban Philadelphia and was seeking ways to convey 
the property to the LaRouche organization, according to sources 
close to the investigation. Smith noted that the last time 
he saw his son, two years ago, after the father had suffered 
a pulmonary embolism, Lewis was preoccupied with LaRouche. 
"It sounds as if he came out of warmth for me, but the questions 
he asked me could only have been directed by somebody else," 
Smith said. Smith added that his son also tried to convince 
him that LaRouche, serving a jail term for conspiracy, fraud, 
and tax violations, was framed. "He asked me who I knew in 
the Justice Department," implying that Newbold Smith could 
help right the supposed wrong.
    Despite his battles, Smith said, he still feels deeply for 
his son. "My feelings for him have never changed. I feel very 
loyal to him and very, very sorry for his plight." (From "Du 
Pont Heir's Father Says He Acted Out of Love," by Robert F. 
Howe, Washington Post, 10/14/92, D1, 6)
Cult Awareness Network
    The FBI said that two of the accused, Moore and Kelley, 
have an "association" with the Chicago-based Cult Awareness 
Network that acts as a clearinghouse for information on groups 
that use "mind control" to recruit and maintain followers. CAN 
Executive Director Cynthia Kisser said that the organization 
advocates deprogramming "but only by legal means. We see the 
benefits of voluntary deprogramming to restore freedom of choice 
through clear thought. . . but we understand that a parent would 
want to consider such a desperate measure [as abduction] to 
get [his] son away from a destructive cult," Kisser said. (From 
"FBI arrests former cop," by Jeff Nelson, Loudoun Times-Mirror, 
Leesburg, VA, 10/8/92, A1, 3)
Father and Son
    Lewis Smith told the Washington Post that the alleged plot was 
spurred by his father's obsession with thwarting his son's independence 
and trying to force him to conform to a du Pont tradition of 
passing great wealth from one generation to the next. "His love 
for me is like his love for his yacht, like an object," Lewis 
Smith said. "If he can't control it, like a piece of furniture, 
he wants to sit on it," added Smith, who is limited by court 
order [pursuant to psychiatric and other testimony at court 
hearings] to a $15,000 monthly allowance out of his $10 million 
holdings.The son also said, "I love my father as any son would 
love his father. But I have pity for what he has become." Remarking 
on what he called a caring but frequently confrontational reIationship 
with his father, Lewis Smith said, "I had a pattern of growing 
up doing things that were somewhat objectionable to my father. 
I grew a beard in college and became a vegetarian for a year. 
This totally enraged him. This was not in the tradition of a 
Main Line blueblood." That rage consumed Newbold Smith when 
Lewis joined the LaRouche organization in the mid-1980s, his 
son said. Regarding his father's indictment, he said: "I wouldn't 
want to see my father go to jail. But if he had to spend a few 
months before probation he should spend it with Lyndon LaRouche 
in Rochester, " Minnesota, where LaRouche is serving his sentence. 
"If anyone could have a rehabilitative effect on my father it 
would be Lyndon LaRouche. It would be poetic justice." (From 
"Bad Blood Between Them," by Robert F. Howe, Washington Post, 
10/22/92, B1, B7)
2 Litigation with Cult Awareness Network.  Scientology.
    A federal judge in Illinois has issued injunctions against two 
Scientologists, in a case brought by the Cult Awareness Network, 
ordering the two to stop using and to destroy CAN trademarked 
stationery and promotional materials indicating that they or 
their groups are CAN affiliates. CAN members have been receiving 
letters purportedly from other CAN members questioning the organization's 
policies and operations. (Cult Observer Report, 10/1/92)
    A California Scientologist, meanwhile, has withdrawn a suit 
he brought - one of many such brought by Scientologists across 
the nation - against CAN executive director Cynthia Kisser 
and CAN California affiliate member Priscilla Coates alleging 
that they discriminated against him by refusing him membership 
in CAN because of his religious beliefs.  (Cult Observer Report, 
10/31/92)
3 Yahweh Ben Yahweh Sentenced to 18 Years
    A federal judge in Miami sentenced Yahweh ben Yahweh to 
18 years in prison in early September for his conviction on 
murder conspiracy charges.  Yahweh was convicted in May for 
ordering the murders of 14 persons [allegedly enemies of his 
authoritarian organization, including apostates] and the firebombing 
of apartments in Delray Beach, FL, where two tenants were killed. 
(For background on the case see The Cult Observer, Vol. 9, No. 
5, page 4 and Vol. 9, No. 7, page 6)
    Prosecutors were upset with the relative leniency of the 
sentence, which means that Yahweh could be eligible for parole 
in six years. Indeed, U.S. District Judge Norman Roettger agreed. 
"From the evidence I heard, the crimes were so horrendous, 
so gross, that the 20-year maximum is simply not commensurate 
with the crimes," he said. "Be that as it may, the Nation of 
Yahweh, under the direction of the defendant, cleaned up its 
act or acts and tried to be a good citizen. "The judge cited 
the group's work in the Miami area, including renovation of 
motels and establishing a grocery store in run-down sections, 
as factors to reduce Yahweh's sentence. Yahweh's defense attorney 
Alcee Hastings called him a "spiritually endowed person." Yahweh 
still faces two Florida state murder charges, and his trial 
is set to begin in November.  (Cult Awareness Network News, 
October 1992, 6, from newspaper reports)
4 New Alliance Party Sues Election Commission.  Lenora Fulani.
    New Alliance Party presidential candidate Lenora Fulani, on 
the ballot in all 50 states, has sued the IRS and Treasury Secretary 
Nicolas Brady for the refusal of the Commission on Presidential 
Debates' refusal to include her in the nationally televised 
events. Before Ross Perot got back in- to the race, the commission 
had said that "after careful consideration . . . [it] determined 
that no nonmajor party candidate currently seeking election 
to the office of President or Vice President . . . has a realistic 
chance of being elected in 1992. Invitations to debate have 
not been extended to any nonmajor party candidate." When Perot 
reentered the race, he was invited to debate. (From "Fulani 
sues system over exclusion from debates," by Kilvyn Anderson, 
Delaware County [PA] Times, 10/14/92, 33)
5 CUT Member Loses Custody of Children.  Carol Ann Scheibler.
    Carol Ann Scheibler, a Church Universal and Triumphant 
member who brought her children to live near the 
group's Montana headquarters in 1989, was officially deprived 
of joint custody of her children by an Illinois judge in August 
because, he ruled, the children were being harmed in their present 
environment. Marion County Superior Court Judge Anthony J. Metz 
III said that the children's welfare, such as health care and 
educational needs, was not being provided, that the children 
"are not being appropriately prepared to fit into society," 
that the children's relationship with their father and other 
relatives was being adversely affected because they were being 
isolated in Montana, and that the children "are being taught 
a fatalistic and suspicious way of life, which encourages them 
to lie to protect the cult." The judge ordered that the husband, 
Scott Scheibler, be given full custody of the children, but 
that Mrs. Scheibler have "reasonable visitation rights."
    Testimony indicated that Mrs. Scheibler went to Montana 
shortly after her divorce and spent several months helping 
to build CUT bomb shelters, relying on public assistance to 
make ends meet, and using the children's child support payments 
for her own needs approximately nine months a year, the judge 
said. Other testimony indicated that Mrs. Scheibler kept her 
three oldest children out of school for a year and a half because 
she would not let them get inoculation. As a result, the children 
fell behind in their schooling. At one point they were enrolled 
in an unaccredited home school with a CUT member for only five 
hours a day. Part of that time was spent "decreeing," which, 
according to testimony, is CUT's "intense, repetitive chanting 
of prescribed prayers of a self-hypnotic nature over an extended 
period."
    The judge's ruling also said testimony presented showed that 
"CUT is, in fact, a cult," under the control of Elizabeth Clare 
Prophet. Prophet, according to the ruling, controls every aspect 
of the church and its members and "instills in its followers 
an immediate fear and dread of nuclear holocaust and a need 
for bomb shelters for the protection of the believers." The 
ruling also said Mrs. Scheibler expressed to others a concern 
over the presence of space aliens on Earth and the dangers they 
present. The judge's order states that "a clear threat to the 
children's emotional health has been demonstrated regarding 
presence in underground shelter drills or visits, and in the 
imposition upon them of a fatalistic approach to life and a 
fear of the end of the world."
6 Lifespring's Possible Financial Problems
    At an October hearing in U.S. District Court for the Southern 
District of New York - Judge Gerhard Goettel presiding in the 
case of Ruehle v. Lifespring and its head John Hanley - Lifespring 
counsel stated that they were uncertain whether Lifespring could 
post a $500,000 bond, and that Lifespring had lost $1 million 
last year and $300,000 so far this year.
    The attorneys involved have been fired by Lifespring but 
refuse to surrender files relevant to the case unless the $500,000 
bond is posted to guarantee payment of legal fees, a claim 
for which is before the court. A new firm retained by Lifespring 
says it will not undertake to represent the group without the 
files. The alleged Lifespring debts are the result of litigation 
brought by persons who suffered from the Lifespring training. 
(Cult Observer Report, 10/2/92)
7 Doomsday Cult Lead Dies.  Anthony Marcolongo, Church of Our First
Love, Sean Dwyer
Anthony Marcolongo, the controversial leader of a Drexel 
Hill (PA) doomsday cult that moved to western Pennsylvania 
in 1989, died in an automobile accident in early October. The 
accident occurred near the 177-acre farm where Marcolongo moved 
with 30 Church of Our First Love sect members in 1989 after 
they disassociated themselves from South Carolina radio preacher 
Brother R.G. Stair, who preached that most major U.S. cities 
would be hit by nuclear weapons before the end of 1988. Within 
the past year, 25 of 28 members left the church, charging Marcolongo 
with drug and alcohol abuse, and six women have filed statements 
with police alleging that Marcolongo sexually abused them while 
they were members, accusations Marcolongo had denied. (From 
"Doomsday leader dies in car crash," by Bill Alnor, Delaware 
County Times [Primos, PA], 10/5/92)
Obedience Theme
    Several ex-followers said ex-diner owner Marcolongo brainwashed 
them. They claimed they were subjected to a rigorous routine 
of personal sacrifice and obedience until they were worn down, 
physically and mentally. It seemed to start, they all said, 
at a diner in Hokmes [PA], when a young woman declared Marcolongo 
to be a "prophet," and once they believed that, they were set 
up. "In the beginning, we met three times a week," an ex-member 
said. "Then it was four times a week. Then we started fasting, 
and then we were meeting seven days a week."
    In July 1988, Marcolongo reportedly began preaching messages 
on unquestioning obedience, which set members up to obey him 
unconditionally. Ex-members said that Marcolongo often taught 
from the Old Testament prophets in the Bible and highlighted 
examples of people dying because they didn't obey. One Drexel 
Hill couple, who have since left the sect, sold their house, 
two cars, and expensive jewelry and gave all the proceeds to 
Marcolongo's church, which then bought the $92,000 farm.
Failed Deprogramming
    Some ex-members say that an alleged abduction and failed 1988 
deprogramming of follower Sean Dwyer, 25, galvanized the sect 
and strengthened Marcolongo's control. One said, "They [the 
deprogrammers] tried to build this rich type of Sun Myung Moon 
cult leader image on Anthony, and this guy (Dwyer) was around 
him (Marcolongo) every day and he knew he wasn't living that 
way." When the deprogrammers finally let Dwyer go, said the 
ex-member, he came back "a spiritual hero." She said that upon 
Dwyer's return, Marcolongo referred to a section in the Bible 
where Jesus told his disciples of a coming day when two people 
will be in a field and one will be taken and that Dwyer had 
survived the ordeal and "came back to what was true and what 
was right. After that, our 'us against the world' mentality 
strengthened," she said.
    Law officers in both eastern and western Pennsylvania decided 
even before the accident not to prosecute Marcolongo on sexual 
abuse charges because, in their estimation, there was insufficient 
evidence of forcible compulsion. "The bottom line," said Clearfield 
County District Attorney Fred Ammerman, " is that these ladies 
have done this voluntarily . . .  you got a bunch of women 
that when they were asked from time to time to masturbate (Marcolongo) 
they did it. They were 100 percent supportive of this group 
and these people did these actions voluntarily. The basis of 
their complaints was that he exercised a religious influence 
on them to do these things. In Pennsylvania an element of a 
sexual abuse charge is that they were forcibly compelled to 
do these things, but their own statements clearly indicated 
that there is no forcible compulsion, and my office is in total 
agreement with the Pennsylvania State Police that there is 
insufficient evidence to prosecute Mr. Marcolongo."
    Most of the women said that law officials have no	understanding 
of mind control and the fear they	felt of the consequences 
if they had not succumbed to Marcolongo's alleged advances. 
They were convinced that if they didn't obey Marcolongo they 
would go to hell.
    Another woman said that prosecutors failed to understand 
that they were all worn down physically. "We worked 18 hours 
a day, slept four to five hours per night, and our sleep was 
interrupted by one hour per night in prayer." It took three 
to four years of Marcolongo wearing them down and getting them 
to an isolated place before they submitted to his advances. 
(From a series in the Delaware County Times [Primos, PA] 8/31/92, 
1, 4-5, by Bill Alnor, "Prophet of sex abuse")
8 TM's Presidential "Brain" Test.  John Hagelin.
    John Hagelin, the presidential candidate of Transcendental 
Meditation's Natural Law Party, challenged George Bush, Bill 
Clinton, and Ross Perot in July to submit to a "brain-mapping" 
to measure if they are mentally fit for the White House. "This 
is a tool that so far government has not used - and I suspect 
I know the reason why," said the 39-year-old TM practitioner 
and physicist. He said he has already been brain tested by 
electroencephalogram and claimed to rank in the top 1 percent 
among those who have submitted to an EEG. The Natural Law 
party [which has candidates contesting numerous constituencies 
around the country] wants to use meditation to cure the nation's 
ills. (From "Candidates Challenged to Mental Test," by Bull 
Workman, San Francisco Chronicle, 7/10/92, A2)
9 "Reparenting" Therapy Abuses.  Margaret Bean-Bayog, Paul Lozano,
Margaret Singer
    The abusive possibilities of the "reparenting" technique of 
psychotherapy have received attention in recent months 
due to the celebrated case of Boston psychiatrist Margaret Bean-Bayog 
and her former patient Paul Lozano, whose therapy included, 
among other things, age regression in order to deal with long-standing 
personal and developmental problems. Changes: The Magazine for 
Personal Growth (August 1992, pp. 57-63) reviews extensively 
the history and current state of the reparenting movement. Along 
the way Changes identifies eight danger signs for psychotherapy 
patients generally, including engaging the patient in an intensely 
personal relationship, robbing the client of independence, and 
using social influence and persuasion to trap the client into 
a cult-like system.
    Psychologist Margaret Singer [a director of the American 
Family Foundation, publisher of the Cult Observer], who is 
regarded as an expert on cult-like therapies, told Changes 
that "reparenting assumes that some set of personality traits 
can be built into someone. And there is no evidence that this 
really works or is truly safe to do." She says that ex-clients 
of reparenting therapists who come to her are often shell-shocked. 
"Their whole sense of self and how to make decisions tend to 
have been badly attacked. In trying to break connections with 
the past, the therapists put such an onslaught on the person 
they end up feeling unsure about everything in life."
10 Ex-Jehovah's Witnesses.  Free Minds Journal
    The July/August issue of Free Minds Journal (formerly the Bethel 
Ministries Newsletter) says the Manhattan Beach, CA publication 
is now "promoting awareness of the Watchtower (Jehovah's Witnesses) 
and other authoritarian religions" through a study of mind control 
techniques and studying more secular ways to counsel persons 
out of association with the Witnesses and similar controlling 
groups, this after a decade of having dealt exhaustively with 
doctrinal aspects of cult membership. (Cult Observer Report, 
10/1/92)
11 Campus Recruitment.  California State University, Church of
Christ, Maria Graves
    The Daily Forty-Niner of California State University at Long 
Beach carried a story in its June 25 issue by Tony Gervase about 
sophomore Maria Graves, a student who tells how she was able 
to break away from the Los Angeles Church of Christ (a spin-off 
of the controversial Boston Church of Christ movement) only 
with great difficulty after being wooed and indoctrinated for 
over a year. The church is known for high-pressure recruiting, 
the exercise of total control over members, and a tendency to 
lead students to neglect school and shun friends and family.
12 TM's Chopra on National Health Board
    Deepak Chopra, M. D., promoter of Transcendental Meditation's 
Ayurvedic medicine - and one of the subjects of a scathing report 
in the Journal of the American Medical Association last year, 
is reportedly serving on a National Institutes of Health board 
that is considering the effectiveness of non-traditional approaches 
to health and medical treatment. (Cult Observer Report, 8/27/92). 
    Chopra is also the subject of a lengthy interview defending 
the validity of Ayurveda and defending the benefits of "Quantum 
Holistic Healing" in Better World (formerly Meditation Magazine), 
Vol. 1, No.2, 1992, 41, 46-47.
13  Leaving the Ashram, Common Boundarys
    Disillusionment, exploitation, corruption, and control are some 
of the themes developed by former followers of groups such as 
Yogi Bhajan's 3HO, John Roger's Movement of Spiritual Inner 
Awareness, the Fellowship of Friends, Swami Muktananda, and 
even a Roman Catholic holy order, in the New Age journal Common 
Boundary's July/August 1992 issue (pp. 32-39).  (Cult Observer 
Report)