JAN
MAR
AUG
4
2015
2016
2017
47 captures
1 Oct 06 - 6 Aug 16
Close Help
Welcome to the Online Archive of the Old PublicEye.Org Website
If You Are Looking for the Current Website for Political Research Associates, Please Click Here
Please remember that this is an archive of an older website for researchers, and it is not being updated.
Therefore, much of the material here is not current.
Much like any library archive, it is "out-of-date."
Brick and mortar libraries do not toss out older resource materials, they archive them.
That is what we have done here.
Home
Issues
Christian Right & Theocracy
Civil Liberties & Political Repression
Economic Justice
Ethno/Racial Justice
Racial Justice
Antisemitism / Islamophobia
White Supremacy
Gender Justice
LGBTQ Equity
Reproductive Justice
Religion & Homophobia, U.S. & Africa
Right Wing Populism
Toxic to Democracy
Conspiracism
Sucker Punch
Challenging the Right
For Activists
Activists: Get Involved
Building a Movement
Right Wing 101
For Researchers
Overview: Study the Right
List of  Bibliographies
More Issues & Topics
Magazine
Current Issue
Past Issues
Subscribe
Books & Reports
Books
Right Wing Populism in America
Mobilizing Resentment
Eyes Right!
by Chip Berlet
More Books
Reports
Platform for Prejudice
Globalizing the Culture Wars
Toxic to Democracy
Pioneer Institute: Privatizing the Common Wealth
Pushed to the Altar
More Reports
Activist Resource Kits
Criminal Justice
Democracy
Immigrant Rights
Public Education
Reproductive Justice
Online Bookstore
Multimedia
Featured Multimedia
Audio
Video
Photos and Slideshows
About
Mission, Values, and History
Programs
Staff and Board
PRAccess Newsletter
Internships and Jobs
Newsroom
Press Releases
PRA in the News
Donate
Connect
E-mail Updates & Alerts
Blogs
Liberty Beat Blog
Chip Berlet Blog
Tweets
Facebook
Subscribe to Public Eye Magazine
Donate
Site Guide
Alphabetical
Categorical
By Author
Lyndon LaRouche: Man of Vision or Venom?
What's the Real Story?
Supporters of Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr. seem to be everywhere these days: on street corners, behind campus literature tables, outside post offices, at anti-war meetings and demonstrations.
Is the man behind the LaRouche Youth Movement a progressive mentor for young activists?
Is he really-as some of his supporters suggest-one of the world's greatest living economists and philosophers?
Is LaRouche, the perennial presidential candidate, an important leader in the Democratic Party?
Or is Lyndon LaRouche a self-promoting demagogue surrounded by devoted followers who sanitize his long history of bigotry and crackpot statements, and dismiss his criminal conviction as the result of a vast conspiracy?
Twenty years ago these questions weren't necessary.
Back then, a wide range of activists across the political spectrum readily denounced Lyndon LaRouche and his international network as a fascistic totalitarian group spreading lunatic political theories, monitoring progressive activists and providing the information to government agencies, and engaging in dubious fundraising schemes.
1
These days, browsers stopping by a LaRouche table at an anti-war rally may be unaware of his past, or the truth about his political views.
LaRouchite publications critical of the Bush Administration, the neoconservatives, and the Iraq War can seem appealing to progressives.
So let's review the LaRouche record.
Sexism and Misogyny
LaRouche has written about "Mothers' Fears," the many psychological problems of activists allegedly caused by their moms.
An early LaRouchite editorial declared that "all across the U.S.A., there are workers who are prepared to fight.
They are held back, most immediately, by pressure from their wives."
2 Women in the LaRouche organization at the time report they were verbally attacked in long criticism sessions as "witches," and "sadistic bitches" and were accused of "mother-dominating" the male members.
3
One former member said she left the LaRouche group in disgust when told that women's feelings of degradation were because female sexual organs are near the anus, thus causing women to confuse sex with excretion.
4
Racism
LaRouche and some of his followers spread racist ideas that range from the absurd-such as the claim that Black musicians did not invent Jazz 5 -to the crude, as in the question posed by LaRouche in one essay: "Can we imagine anything much more viciously sadistic than the Black Ghetto mother?"
6 It's not just Blacks LaRouche has a problem with.
He has dismissed rural Chinese culture as "hideous muck" with its people "paralleling the behavioral stagnation of lower animal life."
7 Elsewhere he dissed a group of Puerto Rican organizers as incompetent, which LaRouche asserted was tied to their being "almost totally sexually impotent."
8
While the cultural accomplishments of people of color have been routinely dismissed by LaRouche, he regularly celebrates Eurocentric icons.
We all become civilized, according to the LaRouchites, by learning to sing along with Bach, Mozart, and Beethoven; 9 reading the work of 17th century European scholars such as Leibniz; 10 and, surprise, studying the words of LaRouche.
Homophobia 11
LaRouche charged that the federal government allowed AIDS to spread because it didn't want to "estrange the votes of a bunch of faggots and cocaine sniffers, the organized gay lobby, as it's called in the United States.
(I don't know why they're `gay,' they're the most miserable creatures I ever saw!)"
12 LaRouche later suggested that history would not judge harshly those who beat gay people to death with baseball bats to stop the spread of AIDS.
13
A LaRouche network newspaper insert distributed in Illinois declared that "as a category, gays and lesbians do not represent a valid voting constituency, and neither do prostitutes, drug pushers, child molesters, warlocks, witches, pornographers, or others who are morally equivalent."
14
Antisemitism & Fascism
While LaRouche's antisemitism is often veiled, he has written that Judaism is a kind of parasitic appendage to Christianity, that "a selfsustaining Judaism never existed and never could exist," and that Jewish culture "is merely the residue left to the Jewish home after everything saleable has been marketed" to non-Jews.
15 In the mid-1970s, LaRouche began incorporating claims of a vast Jewish conspiracy into his writing and the LaRouchites began to forge ties with persons from right-wing racist and antisemitic groups.
16
Antisemitic conspiracy theories were a core element of Hitler's Nazi movement, and later, the Nazis encouraged homophobia-themes picked up by LaRouche and some of his followers.
A top spokesperson of the Anti-Defamation League has said of LaRouche: "He is a small-time Hitler, if I can put it that way, in that he regurgitates many little things that Hitler did but he does it in a somewhat ambivalent way, in a somewhat camouflaged way."
17
Dennis King, author of Lyndon LaRouche and the New American Fascism, argues that often reporters avoid "the terms `fascist,' and `neo-Nazi' which alone could adequately express [LaRouche's] aims and methods."
18 Former U.S. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, however, used the terms "fascist" and "neo-Nazi" to warn of the danger posed by the LaRouche group.
19
Attacking Environmentalism
Pro-LaRouche publications have been at the forefront of denying the reality of global warming 20 and have denounced Greenpeace and other ecology groups.
21 One of the major planks of the LaRouche platform is the immediate construction of numerous nuclear power plants.
22
The LaRouchites have a long history of snooping on environmentalists and other progressive activists and groups, and providing biased and distorted information to the media and government law enforcement and intelligence agencies.
23
In fact, the industrious LaRouchites have run what is essentially a private international intelligence gathering operation for decades.
24 For a time, top LaRouche aides supplied information to Ronald Reagan's National Security Council.
25 They have falsely accused environmental activists (and civil liberties activists) of plotting terrorism.
26
Thuggery
During a five month campaign called "Operation Mop-Up," some LaRouche supporters used fists and martial arts weapons to break up meetings and beat up LaRouche's opponents on the political Left in the 1970s.
Many targets of LaRouchite thuggery were injured and some were even hospitalized.
At the time, one progressive publication described the LaRouchites as "Brownshirts of the Seventies" because of the similarity of these attacks to those carried out by Hitler's "Brownshirt" thugs in the 1920s.
27
Criminality
LaRouche was convicted and sentenced to 15 years in prison for federal conspiracy, mail fraud and tax law violations.
28 Six of LaRouche's aides and fundraisers also were convicted.
Prosecutors argued that LaRouche "oversaw a fund-raising effort in which loans were solicited with false assurances to lenders," according to the Washington Post.
29
The jury also found that the defendants showed "reckless disregard" because they failed "to mention the organization's already severe financial difficulties and that top LaRouche officials never intended to repay the loans."
30 The Post added that nine of the lenders who testified, ("most of them elderly women,") loaned a total of $661,300 to LaRouche's organizations, with only $10,000 being repaid "at a time when LaRouche's group spent $4.2 million on real estate in Virginia," including improvements to LaRouche's "200-acre Leesburg estate."
31 The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the conviction of LaRouche and his six associates, and LaRouche served 5 years in prison before being paroled in 1994.
32
Scores of victims of LaRouchite financial misdeeds, however, told a different story to reporters across the country, revealing a pattern in which some fundraisers for the LaRouche group victimized the elderly (among others) through aggressive fundraising and dubious investment schemes, and failed to repay tens of millions of dollars in loans.
Several told of buying LaRouchite publications with their credit card and then seeing huge unexpected charges on their monthly statement-charges that were difficult if not impossible to have removed.
Some told of purchasing printed matter from LaRouchite literature tables and then finding themselves listed as making a campaign donation to LaRouche's Presidential committee.
LaRouche campaign "donations" were submitted by the LaRouche group for federal Presidential campaign matching funds paid for with tax dollars.
33
LaRouche claimed he had no knowledge of any of this.
He also claimed that he had no income, although he lived in a huge mansion surrounded by armed guards, and regularly jetted around the globe.
LaRouche also had no clue where his food or clothing came from...it just appeared, he claimed.
34 The LaRouchites insist that they were framed and railroaded and that the prosecution was as part of a decades-long politically-motivated international conspiracy involving government officials, numerous others, and a mass media brainwashing campaign.
35
Crackpot Conspiracies
Why is LaRouche considered a crank in some circles?
Consider the following tidbits drawn from numerous similar statements over 30 years.
According to LaRouche, The Beatles (who "had no genuine musical talent") were created by the "British Psychological Warfare Division" and promoted "by agencies which are controlled by British intelligence."
36 Furthermore, the Queen of England and the British royal family run the global drug trade.
37
LaRouche asks: "Who is pushing the world toward war?"
It is "the forces behind the World Wildlife Fund, the Club of Rome, and the heritage of H.G. Wells and the evil Bertrand Russell."
38
Having a hard time as a political activist?
LaRouche has the cure!
He is "confident and capable of ending your political-and sexual-impotence; the two are interconnected aspects of the same problem....I am going to make you organizers...by taking your bedrooms away from you....I shall destroy your sense of safety...." 39
Response
It's not effective to simply dismiss the claims by the LaRouchites as outright lies; they will simply deny it, and anyway, most of the people who surround LaRouche really seem to believe the many myths about the man and his mission.
What do you think?
Check it out.
The next time you pass the LaRouchites, stop and spend some time examining the literature.
You may notice that all the publications from the various related groups-LaRouche PAC, New Federalist, Schiller Institute, LaRouche Youth Movement, Executive Intelligence Review-revolve around the latest speech, article, or statement by a single individual: Lyndon LaRouche.
Is this how truly democratic political and social movements are structured?
Do effective grassroots activists need a guru to tell them what to think?
Whether you want to work for social and economic justice through the electoral system, seek more dramatic systemic change through radical political activism, or just want to speak out against the foreign or domestic policies of the Bush Administration, your commitment of time, energy, and moral outrage will be better served by walking past the LaRouchites toward a group that does not carry so much heavy baggage of bigotry.
40
Chip Berlet, Senior Analyst, Political Research Associates
September 13, 2007.
Read more articles at: http://www.publiceye.org/larouche/
1 Chip Berlet and Matthew N. Lyons, Right-Wing Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort, New York: Guilford Press, 2000, pp. 273-276; Chip Berlet and Joel Bellman, Lyndon LaRouche: Fascism Wrapped in an American Flag, report, Somerville, MA: Political Research Associates, 1989, http://www.publiceye.org/larouche/LaRouche_Theories.html ; Dennis King, Lyndon LaRouche and the New American Fascism, New York: Doubleday, 1989; NCLC: Brownshirts of the Seventies, Arlington, VA: Terrorist Information Project, 1976; See also PRA's PublicEye collection of articles on LaRouche: http://www.publiceye.org/larouche/ .
2 "The World Has Changed," The Campaigner, (Journal of the National Caucus of Labor Committees [founded by LaRouche]), editorial, September 1973, p. 9.
3 Dan Jacobs, "A True History of Lyn Marcus [Lyndon LaRouche] and the Labor Committees," Critical Practice: The Theoretical Journal of the International Workers Party, 1975:
"In addition to brutally stiffling any dissent and free discussion (see above), the `mother's fears' polemic led to a vicious breakdown in the relationship between the sexes in NCLC.
Female members-especially those who at all asserted themselves-came under continual, merciless attack for being `sadistic bitches' and `witches,' for `mother-dominating' their men."
4 Berlet and Bellman, Lyndon LaRouche: Fascism Wrapped in an American Flag.
5 "The Racist Roots of Jazz", The Campaigner, September-October 1980, back cover:
"Jazz was foisted on black Americans by the same oligarchy which had run the U.S. slave trade, with the help of the classically trained but immoral George Gershwin and the Paris-New York circuit of drug-taking avant-garde artists."
6 Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., (writing as "Lyn Marcus"), "The Politics of Male Impotence," internal memo, New York: National Caucus of Labor Committees (NCLC), 1973.
7 Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., "What Happened to Integration?"
The Campaigner, Vol.
8, No. 8, August 1975, pp. 5-40; quote from section: "The Maoism Parallel," pages 26-27.
8 Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., (writing as "L. Marcus"), "The Sexual Impotence of the Puerto Rican Socialist Party," The Campaigner, Vol.
7, No. 1, November, 1973.
9 "The LaRouche Youth Movement and Classical Music," Schiller Institute, http://www.schillerinstitute.org/music/2005/music_work_LYM.html : "Schlanger: Lyndon has written extensively about his lifelong effort to revive the method of communicating ideas which we associate with the great Classical composer, in particular Bach, Mozart, and Beethoven."
10 Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., "Leibniz From Riemann's Standpoint," Schiller Institute, July 14, 1996, http://www.schillerinstitute.org/fid_91-96/963A_lieb_rieman.html .
11 "He Didn't Begin with AIDS: Before Epidemic, LaRouche Found Other Targets to Attack," Sunday Examiner and Chronicle, October 19, 1986, p. A10; Chip Berlet and Joel Bellman, Lyndon LaRouche: Fascism Wrapped in an American Flag.
12 Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., "The End of the Age of Aquarius?"
Executive Intelligence Review, (EIR), January 10, 1986, p. 40.
13 Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., "Teenage Gangs' Lynchings of Gays is Foreseen Soon," New Solidarity,(LaRouche network newspaper), February 9, 1987, p. 8.
14 "End Harold Washington's Consistently Disgusting Career," Illinois Tribunal, July 7, 1986, editorial page.
The Illinois Tribunal was inserted inside issues of the LaRouche group's New Solidarity newspaper; carried on the front page (in the top heading or "flag") the note "Supplement to New Solidarity;" and a front page box with the following text: "The Illinois Tribunal is published weekly as a supplement to New Solidarity.
Subscriptions to New Solidarity are available at $25 per year from Campaigner Publications, P.O. Box 17726, Washington, D.C. 20041-0726;" The Illinois Tribunal, Volume XVII, No. 36, July 7, 1986, p. 1.
15 "Judaism is the religion of a caste of subjects of Christianity, entirely molded by ingenious rabbis to fit into the ideological and secular life of Christianity.
In short, a selfsustaining Judaism never existed and never could exist.
As for Jewish culture otherwise, it is merely the residue left to the Jewish home after everything saleable has been marketed to the Goyim."
Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., (under pen name L. Marcus), "The Case of Ludwig Feuerbach",The Campaigner, December 1973, p. 37, note 76.
"America must be cleansed for its righteous war by the immediate elimination of the Nazi Jewish Lobby and other British agents from the councils of government, industry, and labor."
New Solidarity, "A War-winning Strategy", Editorial, March 1978, p. 5.
To Read More Quotes Click Here: http://www.publiceye.org/larouche/nclc4.html
16 Berlet and Lyons, Right-Wing Populism in America: Too Close for Comfort, pp. 273-276; Berlet and Bellman, Lyndon LaRouche: Fascism Wrapped in an American Flag; King, Lyndon LaRouche and the New American Fascism, pp.
; NCLC: Brownshirts of the Seventies.
See also this lengthier online essay Chip Berlet, "LaRouche's Antisemitic Conspiracism," http://www.publiceye.org/larouche/LaRouche_Theories.html
17 NBC News, "Leader LaRouche, Part 1," segment on First Camera, (news feature program) broadcast March 4, 1984, transcript provided by NBC News, pages not numbered, sequential page 2:
"IRWIN SUALL: He is a small-time Hitler, if I can put it that way, in that he regurgitates many little things that Hitler did but he does it in a somewhat ambivalent way, in a somewhat camouflaged way."
18 Berlet and Bellman, Lyndon LaRouche: Fascism Wrapped in an American Flag:
"According to Dennis King, it is LaRouche's belief that his enemies are subhuman and his followers superhuman which makes `LaRouche more than a political fascist, but a neo-Nazi.'
King...adds that `people afraid of that characterization should sit down and read his ideological writings.
LaRouche talks about the existence of two parasitic species descended from Babylonian culture, the British-Jewish and Russian-Orthodox species, then there are the subhuman masses, then humanity represented by LaRouche and his followers, the Golden Souls, and then a new superhuman race which will evolve from the Golden Souls.
It really is pure Nazism,' says King."
19 King, Lyndon LaRouche and the New American Fascism, p. 373.
Berlet and Bellman, Lyndon LaRouche: Fascism Wrapped in an American Flag:
"After the Illinois primary Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D-NY) blasted his own party for pursuing a policy of ignoring the `infiltration by the neo-Nazi elements of Lyndon H. LaRouche,' and worried that too often, especially in the media, `the LaRouchites' are `dismissed as kooks.'
`In an age of ideology, in an age of totalitarianism, it will not suffice for a political party to be indifferent to and ignorant about such a movement,' said Moynihan."
See also, King, Lyndon LaRouche and the New American Fascism, p. 375.
See also, Bob Hippler, "Fast Times in the Motor City-The First Ten Years of the Fifth Estate: 1965-1975," in Ken Wachsberger, ed., Voices from the Underground: Insider Histories of the Vietnam Era Underground Press.
Volume One.
Tempe, AZ: Mica Press, 1993, p. 27; "The U.S. public is now familiar with Lyndon LaRouche as a right-wing extremist with neo-Nazi politics...."
20 Andrew Rowell, Green Backlash: Global Subversion of the Environmental Movement, New York: Routledge, 1996, p. 135-136; See, for example, these LaRouche publications: "The Holes in the Ozone Scare: The Scientific Evidence That the Sky Isn't Falling," 21st Century Science Associates, 1992; EIR Special Report: "The `Greenhouse Effect' Hoax: A World Federalist Plot," 1989; 21st Century Science Special Report: "The Coming Ice Age: Why Global Warming Is a Scientific Fraud," November, 1997.
See also article by London Guardian columnist George Monbiot "Junk Science: David Bellamy's inaccurate and selective figures on glacier shrinkage are a boon to climate change deniers," The Guardian, London, May 10, 2005 http://www.guardian.co.uk/comment/story/0,,1480279,00.html .
21 David Helvarg, The War Against the Greens: The "Wise-Use" Movement, The New Right, and Anti-Environmental Violence, San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1994.
pp. 254, 257-258.
Rowell, Green Backlash: Global Subversion of the Environmental Movement, pp. 153, 363; See, for example, "Greenpeace, Shock Troops for a New Dark Age," EIR (Executive Intelligence Review), April 21, 1989, pp. 24-32.
LaRouche organization activists and allies cooperated in publicizing a contested documentary film attacking Greenpeace titled "The Man in the Rainbow" ("The Rainbow Man" in English) by Magnus Gudmundsson, a filmmaker from Iceland.
Greenpeace protested parts of the film as false, and pursued legal actions-which in one case was sustained in a Norwegian court ruling; see Rowell, Green Backlash: Global Subversion of the Environmental Movement, pp. 356-359, 362-365.
22 On nuclear power plants: Lyndon LaRouche, speech, presented at the 27th International Economics Symposium, "Visionomics: Challenges and Proposals for Mexico," at the Monterrey Technological Institute in Monterrey, Mexico, March 30, 2006:
"There is, therefore, no real alternative to increasingly large-scale reliance on nuclear and, then, thermonuclear-fusion power," http://www.larouchepac.com/pages/speeches_files/2006/060330_mexico.htm .
"How to Build 6000 Nuclear Plants by 2050," 21st Century Science http://www.21stcenturysciencetech.com/Articles%202005/Nuclear2050.pdf .
Note: while 21st Century Science portrays itself as independent, most journalists who have written about it consider it an arm of the LaRouche network.
See, for example, Helvarg, The War Against the Greens, pp. 255, 258; Rowell, Green Backlash: Global Subversion of the Environmental Movement, pp. 358, 363; Switzer, Green Backlash: The History and Politics of the Environmental Opposition in the U.S., p. 212 and footnote 46, p. 225, citing  Michael W. Robbins, "Biodiversity and Strange Bedfellows, Audubon, vol.
97 (January-February 1995): p. 4.
23 Dennis King, Lyndon LaRouche and the New American Fascism, pp. 234-251; Russ Bellant, Chip Berlet, and Dennis King, "Researchers Call for Probe of Potentially Illegal Acts," Joint Statement, December 16, 1981; James Ridgeway, "Secret Agent Man," Village Voice, October 13, 1987, pp. 17-18;
Chip Berlet, Hunt for Red Menace: How Government Intelligence Agencies and Private Rightwing Countersubversion Groups Forge Ad Hoc Covert Spy Networks that Target Dissidents as Outlaws, revised.
Cambridge, MA: Political Research Associates; [1987] 1993; Berlet and Bellman, Lyndon LaRouche: Fascism Wrapped in an American Flag:
"It was during this period that NCLC began to collect and disseminate intelligence on progressive groups.
LaRouche publications frequently report their security staffers offer intelligence to domestic and foreign government agencies.
While documents released under the Freedom of Information Act reveal that U.S. government agencies frequently dismissed the material provided by the NCLC, it was provided nonetheless.
Legal actions against some police agencies have discovered NCLC material in active files on terrorism and subversion."
24 Ibid.
25 Storer Rowley, "U.S. Got Intelligence Aid from Rightist Group," Chicago Tribune, March 8, 1984.
26 Helvarg, The War Against the Greens, p. 254; Rowell, Green Backlash: Global Subversion of the Environmental Movement, pp. 134, 152-154; Dennis King, Lyndon LaRouche and the New American Fascism, p. 237;
Berlet, Hunt for Red Menace:
"One month before the Clamshell Alliance staged its massive Seabrook occupation, [representatives of the LaRouche group] met with New Hampshire State Police agents, and warned them the demonstration was a cover for a terrorist attack.
Among the documents provided to the police was material from Information Digest, a right-wing blacklist newsletter produced by aides and consultants to the late Rep. Larry McDonald (D-GA), a John Birch Society member who often blasted progressive groups in the Congressional Record.
These USLP-supplied documents were apparently the basis for then-New Hampshire Governor Thompson's statements that the Seabrook Demonstration was being planned by `terrorists.'
In the New Hampshire Police's summary of the USLP material, the Labor Party representatives are repeatedly described as `well- informed' and the police investigators give total credence to the charges that the proposed demonstration was `nothing but a cover for terrorist activity.'
The Seabrook demonstration included non-violent civil disobedience, but no acts of violence on the part of the demonstrators."
27 NCLC: Brownshirts of the Seventies, pp. 13-14; King, Lyndon LaRouche and the New American Fascism, pp. 20-24;
Berlet and Bellman, Lyndon LaRouche: Fascism Wrapped in an American Flag:
"Operation Mop-up raged from May to September of 1973....There were many injuries and some persons required hospitalization.... `Our hearts were not in it,' a former NCLC member says about his participation in Operation Mop-Up.
`But with LaRouche it was all or nothing; the attacks were supposed to harden the membership.'
Forcing student intellectuals into violent confrontations was an exercise in self-degradation which cemented their loyalty to NCLC, ex-members say...their working-class Marxism gave way to an unquestioning, cult-like devotion to LaRouche.
`Most of us now find the whole thing was crazy,' says a seven-year NCLC veteran who left the group in the mid-1970's."
Bob Hippler, "Fast Times in the Motor City-The First Ten Years of the Fifth Estate: 1965-1975," in Ken Wachsberger, ed., Voices from the Underground: Insider Histories of the Vietnam Era Underground Press, Volume One, Tempe, AZ: Mica Press, 1993, p. 28:
"Activists across the country united to defend their meetings from LaRouchian goon attacks."
28 Caryle Murphy, "LaRouche Sentenced to 15 Years in Prison," Washington Post, January 28, 1989, B1, B7; Associated Press, "Supreme Court Upholds LaRouche Convictions," Washington Post, June 12, 1990, B1.
29 Caryle Murphy, "LaRouche Sentenced to 15 Years in Prison," B7.
30 Ibid.
31 Ibid.
Helvarg, The War Against the Greens: The "Wise-Use" Movement, The New Right, and Anti-Environmental Violence, p. 257:
"An IRS expert testified that between 1983 and 1986, LaRouche's organizations borrowed $33.2 million, of which only $3.2 million was repaid."
32 Peter Pae and Leef Smith, "LaRouche, Paroled After 5 Years in Prison, Returns to Loudoun," Washington Post, January 27, 1994.
33 Chip Berlet, "Lyndon LaRouche and the U.S. Labor Party: Cult Fanaticism and the Politics of Paranoia," Chicago Reader, March 7, 1980; Russ Bellant, Chip Berlet, & Dennis King, "Researchers Call for Probe of Potentially Illegal Acts;"
Berlet and Bellman, Lyndon LaRouche: Fascism Wrapped in an American Flag:
"In the fading days of his 1984 Presidential bid, when the cash-starved LaRouche organization was buying expensive commercial air-time, hundreds of persons found unauthorized credit card charges totaling tens of thousands of dollars paid to one of the many front groups operated by the LaRouche network."
These assertions of questionable fundraising practices were backed up through interviews with several former members of the LaRouche group, including two interviewed anonymously  on the NBC First Camera program: NBC News, "Leader LaRouche, Part 1," segment on First Camera, (news feature program) broadcast March 4, 1984, transcript provided by NBC News, pages not numbered, sequential page 5:
34 Leslie Marshall, "LaRouche Claims No Income of His Own," Washington Post, October 31, 1984, B3.
See also transcript of LaRouche deposition in NBC defamation case.
35 "The John Train `Salon'; The Evidence of Criminal Fraud Filed with the Fourth Circuit Court," h ttp://www.larouchein2004.net/exoneration/exon3.htm ; "The Battle for Justice: The LaRouche Case," http://www.schillerinstitute.org/exon/exon_toc.html ; "Have the Mass Media Brainwashed your Neighbor about Lyndon LaRouche?"
http://www.larouchepub.com/exon/exon_toc.html .
36 Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., "Why Your Child Became A Drug Addict," Campaigner Special Report, 1978.
37 NBC News, "Leader LaRouche, Part 1," segment on First Camera, (news feature program) broadcast March 4, 1984, transcript provided by NBC News, pages not numbered, sequential page 2:
"LaROUCHE: Of course she's pushing drugs...that is in the sense of a responsibility: the head of a gang that is pushing drugs; she knows it is happening and she isn't stopping it."
For a video clip of this part of the interview, see Tim Samuels, "Jeremiah Duggan and Lyndon LaRouche", ''Newsnight'', BBC, 2006, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jpSx8K0U21A&mode=related&search .
38 Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr., "An Open Letter to President Brezhnev," Executive Intelligence Review, June 2, 1981
39 Lyndon H. LaRouche, writing as Lyn Marcus, "The Politics of Male Impotence," Internal memo, New York: NCLC, 1973.
40 Adam Graff, "Ignore the Neo-Fascist Cult: Presidential Candidate LaRouche Has Evil, Criminal Intentions," Daily Nexus, February 7, 2006, http://www.dailynexus.com/opinion/2006/10851.html .
More on LaRouche:
Main LaRouche/NCLC Page
The LaRouchite Secret Elite Synthesis
Lyndon LaRouche: Fascism Wrapped in an American Flag
Roots of LaRouche's Antisemitic Theories
A '60'S Socialist Takes a Hard Right
NCLC: America's Largest Political Intelligence Army
Operation Mop-Up
Spotlight On
Civil Liberties & Repression
Economic Justice
LGBTQ Equity
Racial Justice
Reproductive Justice
Christian Right & Theocracy
Understanding the Right
More Article Topics
Explore
Browse Topics | Site Guide | Multimedia Bookstore | Magazine | Publications | Activists Resources
Political Research Associates
About Us
PRA News
Watch short videos about PRA
Donate!
PRA is an affiliate of:
Causes in Common
Talk to Action
Open The Government
Building Human Rights
Stop Spying
Other Allies in Activism and Research
Copyright Information, Terms, and Conditions
Please read our Terms and Conditions for copyright information regarding downloading, copying, printing, and linking material on this site; our disclaimer about links present on this website; and our privacy policy.
Updates and Corrections
Unless otherwise noted, all material on this website is copyright 1981-2013 by Political Research Associates
Home | Magazine | Press | Multimedia | About | Donate | Site Guide
Political Research Associates • 1310 Broadway, Suite 201 • Somerville, MA 02144
Voice: 617.666.5300 • Fax: 617.666.6622 • contact@politicalresearch.org