DEC
MAY
OCT
10
2015
2016
2017
8 captures
15 Apr 14 - 21 Oct 16
Close Help
Campuses :
Twin Cities
Crookston
Duluth
Morris
Rochester
Other Locations
Silha Center for the Study of Media Ethics and Law
silha@umn.edu
612-625-3421
myU OneStop
Events
Bulletin
Bulletin Archive
About
Resources
Bulletin: summer 2011, Volume 16, Number 3
Home > Bulletin : Judges Rebuke Government on Leak Prosecutions
Judges Rebuke Government on Leak Prosecutions
Adverse Rulings Do Not Slow Obama Administration’s Pursuit of  Leaks
In the Obama  administration’s ongoing efforts to track down and prosecute leakers of  classified information, one federal judge quashed a subpoena to a New York  Times reporter for his sources while another rebuked the government’s  prosecution of a former National Security Administration (NSA) official as the  case fell apart.
Risen Subpoena  Quashed, Judge Raises New Question about Espionage Act
On July 29, 2011, U.S. District Judge Leonie Brinkema granted most  of New York Times reporter James Risen’s motion to quash a trial  subpoena demanding that he testify and identify his sources for his stories  about an alleged Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) program aimed at undermining  Iran’s attempts to build a nuclear weapon.
The subpoena was issued as part of  the government’s prosecution of Jeffery Sterling, a former CIA official who  prosecutors claim leaked information about “Operation Merlin,” a failed plan to  pass flawed blueprints to Iran via a former Russian scientist.
Sterling was  indicted in December 2010 for the unauthorized retention and disclosure of “national defense information” in violation of the Espionage Act, 18 U.S.C.  §793 et seq., as well as mail fraud, “unauthorized conveyance of  government property,” and obstruction of justice.
United States v. Sterling,  1:10cr485 (LMB), 2011 U.S. Dist.
LEXIS 87514 (E. D. Va.
July 29, 2011) (For  more on Sterling’s case — and the five other cases the Obama administration has  prosecuted for similar leaks — see “Open Government Advocates Criticize Obama’s  Prosecution of Leakers” in the Winter/Spring 2011 issue of the Silha Bulletin.)
The subpoena Brinkema quashed on July 29 was the third issued to  Risen in connection with the Sterling case.
According to the opinion,  which was released after a classification review on August 3, the first  subpoena was issued by a federal grand jury sitting in the Eastern District of  Virginia in January 2008 and sought Risen’s testimony and information about his  sources for chapter nine of his 2006 book “State of War: The Secret History of  the C.I.A. and the Bush Administration.”
In chapter nine of the book, Risen  described Operation Merlin as an “espionage disaster.”
The grand jury term  expired before a final ruling could be issued on the first subpoena, but by  that time the government had focused its investigation into the Operation  Merlin leak on Sterling.
The second grand jury subpoena was issued in January  2010, seeking “the where, the what, the how, and the when” regarding the  disclosure of classified information for chapter nine of “State of War.”
On  Nov. 30, 2010, Brinkema quashed the second subpoena, concluding that the  government had “essentially admitted” that it had “more than enough evidence to  establish probable cause to indict Sterling” and therefore did not need Risen’s  testimony.
However, Brinkema left the door open for the government to pursue a  trial subpoena against Risen, saying that because the government must prove  Sterling’s guilt “beyond a reasonable doubt” in a trial as opposed to the “probable cause” needed to indict him, the government might have a stronger  argument that Risen’s testimony was vital to its case.
Sterling was indicted on Dec. 22, 2010, and prosecutors issued a  subpoena to Risen on May 23, 2011 seeking his testimony at trial.
The  government explained that it planned to ask Risen to identify Sterling as his  source for chapter nine of “State of War,” provide details about the  reporter-source relationship between the two men, and authenticate his  reporting in the book.
Brinkema ruled that the 4th Circuit recognizes a qualified  privilege for journalists to refuse to testify about confidential sources, and  that the government failed to satisfy a three-part balancing test used to  determine whether a subpoena against a reporter should be upheld.
She upheld  the subpoena only insofar as it requires Risen to confirm that he was the  author of a particular newspaper article or book chapter; that the newspaper  article or book chapter is accurate; and that certain statements in that  article or chapter were, in fact, made by an unnamed source.
“A criminal trial  subpoena is not a free pass for the government to rifle through a reporter’s  notebook,” Brinkema wrote.
Brinkema explained that, contrary to the government’s argument  that the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that there is no federal reporter’s privilege  in Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S. 665 (1972), the 4th Circuit has  interpreted Justice Powell’s concurrence in that case to mean that a privilege  is available in some circumstances, and has recognized a qualified privilege  since the 1977 case United States v. Steelhammer, 561 F.2d 539 (4th Cir.
1977).
The sum of the Circuit Court’s rulings on reporter’s privilege since Steelhammer have established the rule, Brinkema wrote, that “if a reporter presents some  evidence that he obtained information under a confidentiality agreement, or  that a goal of the subpoena is to harass or intimidate the reporter, he may  invoke a qualified privilege against having to testify in a criminal  proceeding.”
Having established that Risen had a valid confidentiality  agreement with his source for his discussion of Operation Merlin in “State of  War,” Brinkema applied a three-part balancing test for determining whether the  privilege should be overcome, which the Circuit Court devised in the 1986 case LaRouche  v. National Broadcasting Corp., 780 F.2d 1184 (4th Cir.
1986).
Under that test, Brinkema wrote, the court must consider 1)  whether the information sought is “relevant” to the case, 2) whether that  information “can be obtained by alternative means,” and 3) whether there is a “compelling interest” in the information.
Brinkema wrote that neither party disputed the relevance of the  information the government sought, but that the government failed to prove that  it could not be obtained by means other than Risen’s testimony, or that there  was a compelling interest in its disclosure.
The government argued that there  were no alternative means to Risen’s testimony about his sources because only  Risen could provide eyewitness testimony, as opposed to circumstantial  evidence, about the identity of his source, and that “it is self evident that  ... Risen is the only source for the information that the government seeks.”
However, Brinkema argued that neither LaRouche nor any other case places  the bar for information about confidential sources at eyewitness testimony as  opposed to circumstantial evidence, and that the government had presented  evidence that undermined its claim that Risen, and Risen alone, could provide  the information about his confidential source.
“This argument clearly misstates  the evidence in the record,” Brinkema wrote, “which ... includes numerous  telephone records, email messages, computer files, and testimony that strongly  indicates that Sterling was Risen’s source.”
A motion Sterling filed with the  Eastern District of Virginia on Feb. 24, 2011 stated that, as part of its  evidence supporting the case against Sterling, the government “provided ...  various telephone records showing calls made by ... Risen” as well as “credit  card and bank records and certain records of his airline travel.”
The  information was probably acquired via third-party subpoenas to Risen’s  telephone and credit card service providers, unbeknownst to Risen.
Brinkema also observed that a former intelligence official with  whom Risen consulted on his national security reporting testified before the  grand jury that Risen had told him that Sterling was his source for information  about Operation Merlin.
Brinkema concluded that “the second LaRouche factor weighs heavily in favor of quashing the subpoena.”
Brinkema ruled that the government also failed to show that there  was a “compelling interest” in forcing Risen to testify about his confidential  sources.
The government first argued that under 4th Circuit precedent the “compelling interest” analysis should not apply to criminal cases, but Brinkema  disagreed, arguing that “the case law does not distinguish between civil  actions and criminal cases.
Accordingly, for a compelling interest to exist,  the information must be necessary, or at the very least, critical to the  litigation at issue.”
The government also argued that because it must prove  Sterling’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt at the trial stage, as opposed to the “much lower evidentiary standard” of probable cause at the grand jury stage,  Risen should be forced to testify.
However, Brinkema explained, rather than  argue that Risen’s testimony is necessary or critical to demonstrating  Sterling’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the government argued that Risen’s  testimony would “simplify the trial and clarify matters for the jury” and “allow for an efficient presentation of the government’s case.”
Brinkema wrote, “an efficient or simpler trial is neither necessary nor critical to  demonstrating Sterling’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.”
If doing so were  sufficient to satisfy LaRouche’s compelling interest standard, Brinkema  concluded, “there would hardly be a qualified reporter’s privilege.”
Although media and free press advocates generally praised the  decision upholding a reporter’s privilege in the Risen case, one of the more  legally technical passages of the Brinkema decision raised some alarm.
In  addressing the second part of the LaRouche test and arguing that other  means were not available to obtain the information Risen could provide, the  government claimed that the grand jury testimony of the former intelligence  official who named Sterling as Risen’s source would be inadmissible at trial  because it would qualify as hearsay.
To the contrary, however, Brinkema stated  that “any statements by Risen to a third party that Sterling was his source  would be admissible hearsay under Fed.
R. Evid.
804 (b)(3) as a statement  against interest.”
Under the federal rules of evidence, a statement that would  otherwise be considered hearsay qualifies for an exception when it “is actually  adverse to the speaker’s penal interest.”
According to Brinkema, Risen’s alleged admission to a third party  that Sterling was his source would be adverse to his penal interest “because  receiving classified information without proper authorization is a federal  felony under 18 U.S.C. 793(e).”
Steven Aftergood, an expert on government secrecy and national  security policy who follows the Obama leak prosecutions closely on his blog  Secrecy News, said Brinkema’s statement that Risen could be guilty of a felony  for “receiving classified information without proper authorization” was  incorrect, “almost certainly a misunderstanding and a misrepresentation of the law.”
In an August 4 post, Aftergood explained that the section of the  Espionage Act Brinkema cited “deals with unauthorized transmission of  classified information; contrary to her assertion, it does not prohibit  unauthorized receipt at all.”
Aftergood said, “The espionage statutes including  793(e) are notoriously ambiguous and susceptible to multiple, conflicting  interpretations, but no one has ever read them as Judge Brinkema did.”
Moreover, Brinkema sought to support her interpretation of § 793(e) with a  footnote citing “U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual § 2M3.3 (providing a base  offense level 29 for convictions for the ‘Unauthorized Receipt of Classified  Information’).”
But according to Aftergood, although § 2M3.3 provides  sentencing guidelines for multiple statutes, the only one that concerns “unauthorized receipt of classified information” is 50 U.S.C. § 783(b), which  applies only to agents or representatives of a foreign government, or to  members of a Communist organization.
“In other words, unless Mr. Risen is a  foreign agent or a Communist, there is no statute that specifically prohibits  him from receiving classified information without authorization.
There just  isn’t,” Aftergood wrote.
The passing claim by Brinkema, Aftergood said, “adds  new confusion to an area of the law that is already complicated and contested.
Ideally, one hopes that she would see fit to correct the record.”
On August 24, the government filed a motion for reconsideration  arguing that “there is no equivalent for Risen’s eyewitness testimony” in the  Sterling trial.
Federal Judge Chides  Prosecutors in Drake Leak Case
On June 9, 2011, Former NSA official Thomas Drake pleaded guilty  to a single count of “exceeding authorized use of a computer” in violation of  18 U.S.C. § 1030, after initially being charged with numerous offenses under  the Espionage Act for allegedly leaking information about government  wiretapping programs to Baltimore Sun reporter Siobhan Gorman in 2006  and 2007.
Commentators like Secrecy News’ Steven Aftergood said the  government’s sudden agreement to strike a plea deal demonstrated that its case  was weaker than it had realized when it zealously pursued Drake, and had  subsequently fallen apart.
Drake’s April 14, 2010 indictment included five  counts of “retention of classified information” under the Espionage Act, 18  U.S.C. § 793 (e), one count of obstruction of justice, and four counts of  making false statements.
Previously, Judge Richard D. Bennett of the U.S. District Court  for the District of Maryland had declined to force Gorman to testify in the  case.
On March 31, 2011, The Baltimore Sun reported that Bennett said in  a hearing that although he would permit Gorman’s articles about NSA program and  management problems to be admitted as evidence in Drake’s trial, he would not  allow Gorman to be called as a witness.
Bennett said forcing Gorman to testify  could end in a “deep, dark hole,” and he was not inclined to jail reporters for  refusing to reveal sources, the Sun reported.
On July 15, 2011, Bennett sentenced Drake to one year of probation  and 240 hours of community service.
According to a transcript of the sentencing  hearing, Bennett declined to impose a $50,000 fine as part of the sentence,  which the government argued was important to “send a message” and discourage  future leaks of classified information.
The judge observed that the case had  already taken a heavy toll on Drake, adding that he did not qualify to receive  a government pension for his time served in the military or with the NSA, and  that the case had a disastrous effect on his career.
“There has been financial  devastation wrought upon this defendant that far exceeds any fine that can be  imposed by me.
And I’m not going to add to that in any way,” Bennett said.
The judge also scolded government prosecutors for what he called “unconscionable” treatment of Drake, whose house was searched by federal agents  investigating the leaks but who was not formally charged until two and a half  years later.
Bennett asked whether there was an explanation for the delay, but  the government could offer none.
Bennett, making reference to the government’s  interest in deterring future leaks, said “I don’t think that deterrence should  include an American citizen waiting two and a half years after their home is  searched to find out if they’re going to be indicted or not.
... It is at the  very root of what this country was founded on against general warrants of the  British.
It was one of the most fundamental things in the Bill of Rights that  this country was not to be exposed to people knocking on the door with  government authority and coming into their homes.
And when it happens, it  should be resolved pretty quickly, and it sure as heck shouldn’t take two and a  half years before someone’s charged after that event.
And that weighs heavily,  obviously, upon this particular judge.”
Bennett added, “somebody somewhere in  the U.S. government has to say to somebody, the Department of Justice, that the  American public deserves better than this.”
Bennett was appointed to the  federal bench in 2003 after being nominated by President George W. Bush.
Other Leak  Investigations Continue
On June 17, The New York Times reported that the Obama  administration’s campaign against government leaks does not appear to have been  slowed by any adverse rulings.
The story reported that Stephen Kim, a former  foreign policy analyst contractor for the U.S. State Department who is charged  with leaking classified information about North Korea to Fox News, is “next in  line in the Obama administration’s unprecedented crackdown on leaks.”
Kim pled  not guilty to the charges on Aug. 27, 2010, and on Aug. 24, 2011, Judge Colleen  Kollar-Kotelly of the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia denied  several of his motions to dismiss, allowing the government to proceed with its  prosecution.
In the meantime, the government’s investigation of WikiLeaks has  continued, although much of it remains shrouded in secrecy.
Pfc. Bradley  Manning, the military intelligence analyst charged with leaking thousands of  military and diplomatic documents and other information to WikiLeaks, is still  awaiting a trial at Fort Leavenworth Joint Regional Correctional Facility in  Kansas.
Manning’s charges include numerous violations of the Uniform Code of  Military Justice (UCMJ) including Article 104, “aiding the enemy,” a charge  which can carry the death penalty.
Prosecutors have stated that they do not  intend to seek the death penalty in Manning’s case, however.
Glenn Greenwald, a blogger for the website Salon, reported June 9,  2011 that several people have been subpoenaed to testify before a grand jury in  Alexandria, Va., that is investigating the possibility of prosecuting WikiLeaks  itself or its principals, including founder Julian Assange.
The New York  Times’ June 17 story called the grand jury investigation “a rare effort to  prosecute those who publish secrets, rather than those who leak them.”
Greenwald reported that those subpoenaed include David House, a researcher at  the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and founder of the Bradley Manning  Support Network; Manning’s ex-boyfriend Tyler Watkins; and Nadia Heninger, a  cryptography expert at the University of California San Diego.
Greenwald  reported that at least some of those subpoenaed had vowed not to cooperate with  the grand jury.
In  March 2011, a federal judge upheld an order demanding the disclosure of account  information of three Twitter users with ties to WikiLeaks, finding that the  users lacked standing to challenge the order, the order was valid because it  was “relevant and material to a legitimate law enforcement inquiry,” and did  not violate the Fourth Amendment bar on unreasonable search and seizure because  it did not infringe on “an expectation of privacy that society considers  reasonable.”
(For more on the WikiLeaks investigation case see “Open Government  Advocates Criticize Obama’s Prosecution of Leakers” in the Winter/Spring 2011  issue of the Silha Bulletin.
Mark Stephens, the 2011 Silha Lecturer, has  worked as an attorney for Assange; his lecture is titled “Free Speech and the  Digital Challenge Around the Globe: A Conversation with Mark Stephens.”
See “Silha Lecture Features Mark Stephens, International Free Expression Advocate” on the top of this page of the Silha Bulletin.)
–  Patrick File
Silha Bulletin Editor
September  1, 2011
Address: 111 Murphy Hall , 206 Church St SE , Minneapolis, MN 55455
Phone: 612-625-3421
Email: silha@umn.edu
© 2009 Regents of the University of Minnesota.
All rights reserved.
The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer
Last modified on January 16, 2015
Twin Cities Campus:
Parking & Transportation
Maps & Directions
Directories
Contact U of M
Privacy