MAY
MAY
Jun
10
2013
2016
2017
3 captures
3 Oct 13 - 10 May 16
Close Help
Subscribe Now
Subscribe
campaign: inyt2015_bar1_digi_usd_4L9UF -- 277474, creative: inyt2015_bar1_digi_buttononly_usd_4L9UF -- 406560, page: www.nytimes.com/archive/article/us, targetedPage: www.nytimes.com/archive/article/us, position: Bar1
Log In
Register Now
Help
Home Page
Today's Paper
Video
Most Popular
Edition: U.S. / Global
Search All NYTimes.com
U.S.
World
U.S.
Politics
Education
Texas
N.Y. / Region
Business
Technology
Science
Health
Sports
Opinion
Arts
Style
Travel
Jobs
Real Estate
Autos
LaRouche Enters Not Guilty Plea in a Fraud Case
AP
Published: October 18, 1988
ALEXANDRIA, Va., Oct. 17— Lyndon H. LaRouche Jr., the political extremist, and six co-defendants pleaded not guilty today to Federal charges of fraud and conspiracy in connection with what the authorities said was a scheme to raise money.
At an arraignment Mr. LaRouche and his associates promised to return to court for trial Nov. 21 and for a hearing on a motion Nov. 10.
Federal District Judge Albert V. Bryan Jr. sped the proceeding by saying he assumed that all the defendants were pleading not guilty and asking for a jury trial.
Their lawyers nodded agreement.
At a news conference in Washington earlier today Mr. LaRouche called the indictment ''a heap of garbage'' and asserted: ''I'm certainly not guilty.'' '
Dirty Trick'
''This is purely a political stunt,'' said Mr. LaRouche, 66 years old, an independent candidate for President who is campaigning in 12 states and the District of Columbia. ''
Nebulous charges never occur this close to an election except as a dirty trick.''
Mr. LaRouche was indicted Friday on 13 counts of mail fraud, conspiracy to commit mail fraud and conspiracy to defraud the Internal Revenue Service.
Conviction on all counts carries a possible prison term of 65 years and fines of $3.25 million.
Six of his associates also were charged and would face lesser sentences if convicted.
The grand jury said the defendants had raised more than $34 million through loans to Mr. LaRouche's political and commercial groups from people around the country between 1983 and 1987 with no intention of repaying them.
The indictment said Mr. LaRouche conspired to defraud the I.R.S. by having his expenses paid by friends and groups associated with him.
It added that he had not filed a federal income tax return since at least 1979.
United States Attorney Henry Hudson said Friday that Mr. LaRouche was being treated like any other citizen accused of a crime.
The seven defendants were all released on their own personal recognizance but pledged to pay $5,000 if they failed to appear for court dates.
Judge Bryan allowed them unlimited travel in the United States and abroad so long as they informed the court clerk in advance.
Assistant United States Attorney Kent Robinson had objected to international travel but was overruled.
An earlier Federal trial of Mr. LaRouche and other associates in Boston ended in a mistrial because jurors objected to the length of the case.
The Boston case is scheduled for retrial in January.
Inside NYTimes.com
Health »
Too Hot to Handle
Arts »
The Harmony of Liberty
Opinion »
Should Beach Privatization Be Allowed?
Room for Debate asks whether shorefront homeowners should have to open their land to all comers.
Sports »
A Woman’s Leadership May Steady Murray
Opinion »
Menagerie: Streaming Eagles
U.S. »
Curlers’ Aim: Sweep to a Win Over the Heat
Television »
The Cold War Brews Anew in Prime Time
Book Review »
Command Performance
Opinion »
Op-Ed: Fooling Mexican Fans
World »
Reading, Writing and Allegations
Opinion »
Op-Ed: Elite, Separate, Unequal
New York City’s top public schools must become more diverse.
Business »
Vice Has Media Giants Salivating
© 2016 The New York Times Company
Site Map
Privacy
Your Ad Choices
Advertise
Terms of Sale
Terms of Service
Work With Us
RSS
Help
Contact Us
Site Feedback
campaign: nyt2014_edu_propensity_cookie_dropper -- 256873, creative: nyt2015_edu_personalized_isEDU_cookie_dropper -- 401071, page: www.nytimes.com/archive/article/us, targetedPage: www.nytimes.com/archive/article/us, position: Inv1