Dietrich v The Queen
Right to a fair trial
Right to legal representation
Access to Justice
Dietrich v The Queen [1982] HCA 57
On 17 December 1986, Olaf Dietrich arrived in Melbourne after a trip to Thailand.
He was arrested the next day by the Australian Federal Police, and was alleged to have imported seventy grams of the drug heroin.
There was compelling evidence that Dietrich had swallowed small packets of the drug to smuggle them through customs.
He claimed in court the drugs had been planted by the Police.
Dietrich was charged in County Court of Victoria on four charges relating to drug trafficking under the Customs Act 1901 (Cth).
During the trial he had no legal representation.
He had applied for assistance from the Legal Aid Commission of Victoria but they would not represent him unless he agreed to plead guilty to all charges.
He then applied to the Supreme Court of Victoria for legal assistance but this request was also denied.
He was convicted in the Victorian County Court of three out of four charges brought against him.
Dietrich appealed his convictions to the Supreme Court, but the Court refused to hear his appeal.
He appealed to the High Court of Australia.
A majority of judges in the High Court decided that Dietrich had the right to a fair trial, and that the lack of legal representation meant that the original trial was unfair.
The justices also concluded that when an accused, through no fault of their own, does not have legal representation when charged with a serious offence, a judge may order the trial be delayed (stayed) until legal representation is available.
Dietrich later changed his name to Hugo Rich and received a life sentence for the murder of a security guard in 2009.
The Dietrich case established the right to have legal representation when charged with a serious criminal offence.
This case changed the way Legal Aid works in Australia because poor people charged with a serious criminal offences must be given legal representation or the judge can stop the trial.
This enforces the rule of law principles of fair trial and equality of treatment before the law.
Discussion Questions: