Dietrich v The Queen
Katie, Hailey, Elly, Vera, Alfonso, Zaen, Abdul Dietrich V The Queen 1.
Case decided in the high court of Australia on 13 November 1992.
2.
County Court of Victoria in 1988 for a trafficking offense under the Customs Act 1901.
3.
Trial lasted 40 days.
4.
Olaf Dietrich was arrested on 18 December 1986.
5.
Dietrich produced nearly 70 grams of heroin that he’d swallowed in condoms at the hospital in Pentridge Prison.
1.
Olaf Dietrich was charged in the Country Court of Victoria on four counts.
2.
The first three counts were in relation to the Importation and possession of a trafficable quantity of heroin.
3.
The fourth count was laid in relation to a separate quantity of heroin.
4.
Punishable by life imprisonment or for a period in which the commonwealth thought appropriate.
5.
The applicant applied for legal aid, but the Legal Aid Commission indicated that aid would only be provided for a plea of guilty.
The Parties to the case 1) The right to a fair trial.
.
2) He had only been offered legal aid on the terms that he pleaded guilty to his charges of drug smuggling.
3) the court found that in Dietrich’s case it would have been appropriate and that not having legal representation would have deprived him of the right to a fair trial.
The Key Constitutional Issues!
1) Judges didn’t have the power to appoint a counsel for the accused
2) They did have the power to adjourn a case if it would be fairer for the accused.
3) Judges weren’t sure if they should use their power to adjourn trials and put pressure on legal aid agencies .
4) Olaf Dietrich won his Appeal, and the adjourn was granted by the high court.
The High Courts Decision!!!
1.
What is Dietrich’s first name?
2.
On what date did the high court bring
down their decision in the case of
Dietrich v the Queen?
3.
In which state's county court was Dietrich initially tried for?
And in what year?
4.
How many grams of heroin did Dietrich import?
5.
What did he use to conceal the heroin with?
6.
Where did the police find the heroin in Dietrich’s flat?
7.
Where did Dietrich pass the remainder of the heroin?
8.
What did Dietrich try to allege?
9.
What date was Dietrich arrested?
QUIZ!!!!
Basic Facts