APR
JAN
JUL
19
2014
2016
2017
5 captures
16 Sep 14 - 5 Jul 16
Close Help
Skip to content
IN BLACK AND WHITE,JAYSIKUKU BLOG
This WordPress.com site .where the truth is finally revealed
Posted on
July 4, 2014
RIGHT TO LEGAL REPRESENTATION UNDER THE 2010 CONSTITUTION IS IT AN ABSOLUTE RIGHT
Preface
On 27 august, on the promulgation of the new constitution a new chapter on right to a justice related rights was opened. The new constitution sought to re orient and advance to a new level justice related rights. The constitution recognized right to legal aid as an integral component to a fair trial.
In my research I have gone to greater length in trying to demystify right to legal representation and whether it’s absolute. It would be prudent to start at the starting point hence define what rights are, the history of legal representation, its state under the old constitution and new constitution, comparative analysis with other legal systems and whether it is an absolute right.
Kenya is still crawling when it comes to constitution as it is still at its infancy, the fruits of the provision are still being tested by litigants, it is my firm belief that this research will help further shed light and strike debate as to the provision of the said right, its implementation, lacuna and gains of the right to legal representation under the new constitution
INTRODUCTION
Definition of rights
By definition rights are demands or claims individuals or groups make that are essential for individual well being, dignity and fulfillment ,the deprivation of which may lead to great affront to justice.accordingly they stand above ordinary laws of the land. This entitlements become due to every person at the commencement of life thus the only qualification for earning them  is the act of being simply human CITATION MKi12 \l 1033  (M Kiwinda Mbodenyi, 2012).
Under the 2010constitution the bill of rights is represented as an integral part of the countries values and aspirations .Its purpose being to preserve the dignity of individuals and communities and to promote social justice and realization of the potential of all human beings.chapter 4 of the 2010 constitution deals with the bill of rights
What is an Absolute right?
Absolute right falls under a category of conventional rights.Convetional rights fall under three categories namely
Absolute right
Qualified right
Limited  right
Absolute rights are rights which cannot be infringed under any circumstances.
Qualified rights are rights which the state can lawfully interfere with in certain circumstances. Generally in such rights the right is stated out at the start then qualified by other criteria. An example of such a right under the 2010 constitution article 26 [3] a person shall not be deprived of life intentionally except to the extend authorized
limited rights are rights which also have limits for example under 2010 constititutionwhere it is stated out that every person has a right to freedom and security and includes the right not to be deprived of freedom arbitrarily or without course.this in essence shows that this is an limited right which has a limit in that it cannot be exercised but should be in a human way and not arbitral. security and includes the right not to be deprived of freedom arbitrarily or without course.this in essence shows that this is an limited right which has a limit in that it cannot be exercised but should be in a human way and not arbitral.
Rights absolute and nonderogable
Absolute rights are rights which cannot be limited for any reason circumstance justifies a qualification or limitation of of absolute rights. Absolute rights cannot be suspend or  restricted  even during a state of emergency .our 2010 constitution recognizes a number of absolute rights which include freedom of conscience ,religion, belief and opinion ,freedom of expression .
Nonderogable rights on the other hand are rights which can be suspended. International covenant on civil and political rights (ICPR) provides for derogation power which allows governments to temporarily suspend the application of some rights in the exceptional circumstance of a state of emergency and subject to certain conditions including official notification. Under the 2010 Kenyan constitution an example of a derogable includes freedom of association.this right is subject to certain restraints in that the president and the police force have the prerogative powers to outlaw association with certain groups. This can be seen in the Mombasa republican council (MRC).
Certain rights are nonderogable that is they cannot be suspended even in state of emergency. Article 4(2) of International covenant on civil and political right  provides that no deterrence is permitted on
Prohibition against retrospective right to life
freedom from torture or cruelty
freedom of thought conscience and religion
operation of criminal law
In times of emergency which threatens the life of a nation and existence of which is officially claimed parties in the war may sign covenants to the extent that they are not inconsistent and do not discriminate sorely on race, color, sex,language or social origin .
Distinction between absolute rights and nonderogable rights.
Non derogable rights may either be absolute or non absolute. Whereas nonderogable right provide for limitation in there ordinary application for example freedom of religion may be subject to limitations in accordance with article 26 concerning right to life. There if a religion that allows derives life from a person in any way it will be deemed illegal. Also article 26 of the 2010 constitution protects life but 26(3) deprivation of life that is authorized by the law is permitted. This can be seen in the instances of abortion
HISTORY OF RIGHT TO LEGAL REPRESENTATION
INDRODUCTION
Legal aid has a close relationship with welfare of the state and influenced by attitudes towards walfare.historically legal representation has played a strong role in ensuring respect for economic social and cultural rights. Legal aid is essential in providing individuals with access to justice by allowing the individual legal enforcement of economic social and cultural rights. This views developed service providers within market based philosophy that emphasized on citizen as consumerd by Mauro cappelletti when democracies with capital economies established liberal welfare states that focused on the individual. States established themselves as contractors. Historically legal aid has its roots in the right to counsel and right to a fair trial movement of 19th century continental European countries.inititially a duty solicitor was appointed for those who could not afford legal aid. The duty solicitors would act on pro bono basis. Despite this most countries had no formal approach to legal aid and the poor relied on charity work from lawyers.
despite the fact that  legal representations roots to long ago it  not until the 19th century that saw the birth of modern legal represantion.beginning in 1808 American legal profession expressed commitment to have free legal assistance in form if legal aid associations.
The roots of modern right to council can be found in the case of Werb V Baird, the Indiana supreme court in1853 recognized a right to an attorney at public expense for an indigent person accused of a crime, this was grounded I the position a civilized society and not in constitutional or statutory law in the obidadictum   the judge had this to say
“it is not to be thought of in a civilized society for a moment that any citizen Put in jeopardy of life or liberty should be debarred of counsel because  he    is  too poor  to respect itself to sit to hear such a trial, the defense of the poor in such cases  which will at once be conceded as essential to the accused t o the trial’’
6th amendment of the United states of America constitution states that in all criminal prosecutions the accused should enjoy the right  have the assistance of a counsel   his defense .this position was reaffirmed in 1938 in the case of John v ZerbstWhere the petitioner had been convicted in a federal court of felonious possessing ,uttering and passing counterfeit money in a trial where he had not been represented by an attorney but instead himself, he filed for a herbals corpus claiming his sixth amendment right to counsel had been violated. It was held that since the sixth amendment entitles one charged with crime to the assistance of algal counsel, compliance with this constitutional mandate is an essential jurisdiction perquisite to a federal court to deprive an accused of his life or liberty.
In the 20th century most countries have pro bono efforts o to provide f lawyers to provide defense for the accused.
The USA Supreme Court developed the 6th amendment right to legal counsel in state proceedings gradually. in   Powell v Alabamathe court held that counsel was required in all state capital proceedings .the reasoning in this case was that the right to be heard would in  many cases of little avail if it did not comprehend the right to be heard by counsel, that even the educated layman has small and sometimes no skill in the science of law, if charged with a crime he is generally incapable generally for determining for himself whether the indictment is good or bad because he is unfamiliar with the rules of evidence, left without the aid of a counsel  he may be put on a trial without a proper charge and convicted upon incompetent evidence. He lacks the skill and knowledge to adequately prepare a defense. That he requires the guiding hands of a counsel at every step of the proceeding   without it though he may be guilty he faces the danger of being convicted because heroes not know how to establish his innocence.
When it comes to non capital offences the most significant decision was in the case of Gideon v weinwright the courts position was that an indigent person is entitled to the appointment of a defense counsel at state expense. it reasoning was that in an adversarial system any person hauled to court who is too poor to hire a lawyer cannot be assured of a fair trial unless counsel is provided for him, that government hires lawyers to prosecute and defendants who have the money hire lawyers to defend are strongest indications of the widespread belief that lawyers are necessities and not luxuries. The right of one charged with crime may not be deemed fundamental but essential to fair trial.
Four years later in Re Gault  the Supreme Court extended to children the same right as adults
In argersinger v Hamlin the court extended this right to all misdemeanors where there was a potential of loss of liberty.
In the use efforts have been put in place to systemize and standardize the right to indigent persons this is set out by the national advisory commission on criminal justice standards and goals who wrote a basic set of standards governing indigent person’s defense in 1973.
COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF LEGAL REPRESENTATION IN KENYA AND AUSTRALIA
Legal representation in Australia
INDRODUCTION
Australia recognizes that ac legal aid representation is an important element in ensuring justice for all. They provide legal aid for people assessed as not being able to afford costs of a court case. The federal government attorney is responsible for administering funding for provisions of legal aid and services for federal law matters through legal aid services for indigent persons.
State and territory governments fund legal aid services for cases tried under state and territory law. There are two independent legal aid commissions in each of the states and territories. Funding is provided for by the federal government.
HISTORY
Australia through its court systems has been able to develop the principle of right to legal representation progressively. A land mark case that portrays this is the case of Dietrich v Queen an important case. It concerned the nature of rights to a fair trial and under what circumstances indigent defendants should be provided legal aid by the state.
The main argument by Dietrich was that the trial was a miscarriage of justice since he did not have legal representation. He argued that he would have to be provided by an advocate at state expense.altrenativly that the judge would have stayed or adjourned the trial until he was able to obtain counsel.
the case determined that though there is no absolute right to have a public funded trial, in most cases a judge would grand any request for adjournment  if the accused is unrepresented.
Australia is also a signatory of ICPR.Article 14(3) which requires that accused should have legal assistance provided to thembut it has not incorporated the ICPR onto any of its domesticated laws with any specific legislation
Although it is common for Australian courts to acknowledge developments in other law countries, laws on right to legal representation in other countries are based on particular provisions of bill of rights in there respected countries.australia does not have any provisions on rights in either the constitution or legislation.
In analyzing whether a right to legal representation is paramount to justice, courts always try to analyses if the accused would have been acquitted even with full representation
LEGAL REPRESENTATION IN KENYA
INDRODUCTION
The right to legal representation under our constitution has been a fairly new concept. The old constitution under section 77didaccept the right to legal representation but not at the expense of the state. However the 2010 constitution under article 50(1) provides that the state will provide for counsel where substantial injustice will occur if counsel will not be availed. despite the fact that this right was still at infancy stage Kenya had ratified the international conventions on civil and political right.despite signing it into law.kenya did not sign the universal declaration of human rights which recognized right to legal counsel as an integral right and paramount to a fair trial. This amounts to it being a soft law. This meant that this international declaration was playing secondary to Kenyan law.
RIGHT TO LEGAL REPRESENTATIONUNDER PREVIOUS CONSTITUTION
Right to legal representation under the previous constitution was allowed but not that developed. Section 77(2) allowed persons charged with criminal offences to be present in court and have legal representation of their own choice. This provision assured a person of legal representation of his own choice. This essential means that’s he can chose which legal counsel he wants to represent him.
However the old constitution reserves this right to criminal offences only. It does not state the nature of the criminal offences in which counsel must be provided. This right is also tasked to at the individuals’ expense and not at the states expense. This provided a difficulty in that though it was a right, its fulfillment was at your expense making it a preserve of the rich. Indigent defendants could not be assured of being provided counsel at states expense.
Legal representation then was not fully developed; there were no legal aid clinics to help in the attainment of this right. However there were personal initiatives through nongovernmental organizations such as law society of Kenya, law society of Kenya kituo cha sheria and cradle Kenya to provide pro bono services to indigent defendants. Cradle Kenya prided itself in providing legal aid to children who cannot afford legal aid.
Only few people suspected to have committed serious offences were offered counsel by the state, this composed of murder cases in which the state provided legal counsel and treason. It is important to note that these offences were only triable by the high court after committal proceedings have been held by magistrate’s court during which the accused are not represented by the advocate where the proceedings are in the nature of inquiries and not trials. There is a high probability of accused making self incriminating evidence.
However not all serious offences got counsel by the state. In offences such as robbery with violence the onus was on the accused to find counsel for himself.
The old constitution recognized in some way that counsel was an integral part to a fair trial but refused to recognize this. Under the civil procedure act cap21 order 33 recognizes paupers by providing procedures for pauper briefs which are free, however free legal assistance is not assured of them. However there was a form of state legal aid admixture by the chief justice through the registrar and deputy registrar of the high court and court of appeal by appointing advocates to defend accused persons who enable to afford services of an advocate. The scheme is popularly known as ‘pauper briefs’. However most experienced advocates avoided taking pauper briefs because of the little monetary terms it attracted. This was left to young advocates who were still trying to make a name in the field of advocacy
Kenya was also a party to a number of treaties touching on right to legal representation. Below is a table showing the treaty, date when acceded and date when signed.
It is important to note that under the old constitution there was no hierarchy of laws. There was no express recognition of right to legal representation enshrined in international treaties. In okunda versus republicThe high court limited the sources of law in Kenya to those listed under the judicature actthe court held that international laws not being one of the listed sources then was not an independent source of law unless domesticated through either a constitutional amendment or an act of parliament, international laws had no legal effect on the laws of Kenya. This was also reiterated in pattni & another republic.GITHINJI, Osiemo and Otieno ruled that
    ‘‘Although those instruments testify to globalization of fundamental rights and freedoms of an individual, it is our constitution as a law which is paramount’’
This in essence meant that international statutes which had not been domesticated did not form part of our Kenyan law. International statutes such as international conventions on civil and political rights did not form part of Kenyan law hence Kenyan courts could not refer to it
RIGHT TO LEGAL REPRESENTATION UNDER THE NEW CONSTITUTION
Under the new constitution right to legal representation was given a new lease of life. First under article 50(h) legal representation is not only a right but the state has been put to task to ensure that it is guaranteed where substantial injustice will occur.’
For the first time since independence there is the express constitutional recognition of international laws under article 2(5) as well as treaties ratified by the state.due to this provision the international convention on civil and political rights which was acceded on 1 may 1972 and signed on 23 march 1976 effectively forms part of Kenyan law. This goes a long way in safeguarding the right to legal representation as provided b the statute.
However it is important to note that despite there being various provisions at the international scale on right to legal representation, Kenya has not signed the protocol on the statute of the African court of justice and human rights which provides window for right to legal representation.
The constitutions position on right to legal representation can best  be summed up by Pravin Bowry  on mandatory legal represention.in it he argues that legal representation in criminal cases is purely dependant on an individual’s financial ability, he further attests that the acquittal of kamlesh pattni further shows how legal representation is vital to a fair trial. That the fact that the state hires prosecution and able defendants hire legal teams is proof that counsel is vital to case. It is this informed position that made the right to legal representation be entrenched in the constitution so as to safeguard indigent defendants.
It is the duty of the state to ensure that every individual enjoys his or her right to justice and this includes provision of legal services to those who are likely to suffer if not provided to them. Our 2010 constitution takes cognizance of this fact by providing for right to a fair hearing .our Kenya constitution has adopted international standards in its approach in expending justice. Under article 50(g)  recognizes defense by counsel of one’s choice and being informed of this right promptly. Article 50(h) further expounds the right to a fair hearing by entrenching the right to have an advocate assigned to the accused person by state and at state expense, if substantial justice would result.
It is imperative to note that under the previous constitution was laden with many limitations which prevented the enjoyment of this right to legal representation.
The attorney general’s office grants legal aid in criminal and civil matters to civil servants who have been charged with offences arising from their performance of official duties, this is provided under G50 of the code of regulations made pursuant to the provisions of service commission act.
The director of prosecutions is given state powers of prosecution and may take over and continue any criminal proceeding commenced in any court that have been instituted or undertaken by another person or authority.this has been construed by some as offering legal aid. However this is not the case as the director of public prosecution is carrying outbids public duty which the private prosecutor was doing on his behalf.
Fruits to this provision can be seen in David Njoroge Macharia versus republic where the court of appeal affirmed that under the new constitution that an accused person has the right to have a lawyer provided at the expense of the state in cases where substantial injustice would otherwise occur. Such cases that involve complex or fact of law the court listed down some of the instances that would involve right to legal counsel as attested by the court included
complex issues of law
issues of fact of law
conducting his own defense
this right to legal representation was further seen in john swakka & two others.issue was whether failure by the state to provide legal representation to persons charged with offence of robbery with violence amounted to violation of rights the court held that though there is express recognition of the duty by the state to provide legal representation to the accused persons in order to avoid substantial injustice,
Though legal representation is guaranteed parliament has not yet enacted legislation that create a conducive environment for attainment of this right.
IS RIGHT TO LEGAL REPRESENTATIONAN INHERENT RIGHT
Inherent right is defined as an authority possessed without it being derived from another.it is also defined as an essential constituent characteristic.the question I sought to answer was whether right to legal representation is an inherent right and if lack of it in a trial amounts to a nullity of the outcome of a trial.
One of the oldest western philosophers on rights   argues that they are a product of natural law developed by a process of natural or social evolution.
One of the benefits that come with the new constitution is the constitutional protection of socio economic rights. The difference that comes with these rights is that whereas political rights require the heavy arm of the government to restrain from engaging in certain activities, the latter requires the government to take part in ensuring access to certain conditions. Mostly this involves monetary implications.
Right to legal representation forms part of socio economic rights. By nature they have monetary implications to the government
It is indeed costly to set up legal aid institutions to provide legal aid to indigent defendants at public expense.
De Waal, Curie and Erasmus summarized their doubts in attainment of this right
Attempts to make social, economic and cultural rights part of a constitution are usually met by the argument that this rights are inherently non justifiable, in other words they are ill suited for enforcement by the judiciary. It has been argued that there application requires that courts do direct the way in which the government distributes the state resources  and is thus beyond the scope of judicial fanction.this is because the judiciary is an elite and undemocratically appointed branch of the state. Therefore the argument goes; it lacks the democratic legitimacy necessary to decide on division of social resources between factions groups and communities in society.
In trying to found out whether legal representation is absolute I found out the existence of two types of rights. Natural rights and legal rights. Legal rights those bestowed to people b a given legal system whilst natural right those contingent upon and costumes of any particular government.
According to me legal representation falls under legal representation under legal rights, its existence is derived from the laws of the land. This include article of 50 (h) of the institution which guarantees right to legal counsel and international charter on civil and political rights.
In my opinion this legal rights are derived statutes hence not absolute right to legal representation forms part of absolute rights.
H.LA HART argues that if there are any rights at all, they must be right to liberty. A trial of any matter in a court of law may amount to a person losing his liberty. Legal representation is paramount to a person securing justice which in this sense is securing his justice.
Article 50 (2) provides for right to a fair trial. Under article 50 (g) an accused has a right to chose to be represented by an advocate of his and be informed of this right. My interest was in the name chose. By definition chose is to pick out, select or chose from a number of alternatives.the makers of the 2010 constitution were silent on the meaning of the word chose…
In my opinion I tend that to feel that the word chose tends to bring in some confusion.choise may mean that the accused can have the option of deciding if to have counsel or not, chose may also mean that the accused is given the opportunity of deciding which advocate he feels is best suited to represent him.
In stark contrast to the USA constitution the 6th amendment of the constitution states that
‘In all criminal proceedings the accused shall enjoy the right to have assistance of legal counsel for his defence’.this fills some of the gaps as to whether it’s absolute. In farretta v Californiathe USA Supreme Court held that defendants have a constitutional right to refuse counsel and represent themselves in criminal proceedings.
Under article 50 (h) it states that accused have a right to an advocate at state expense if substantial injustice would otherwise result. To me it’s like the constitution makes the right conditional. The conditition is that only if substantial injustice would otherwise result. This in essence shows that there are instances where substantial injustice would not result for lack of counsel in a trial. Our constitution is silent on what substantial injustice hence still open to debate as to what substantial injustice is.
In john swakka v director of public prosecution issue arose as to whether failure by the state to provide legal benefit of legal representation to indigent persons charged with offence of robbery amounted to violation of rights. In the ruling it was stated that although there is recognition of duty by the state to provide legal representation to accused persons in order to avoid substantial injustice there is nothing that shows that the intention is to have it immediately or that all trials carried without representation amounts to a nullity.
The court also recognized the implications of implementing the right to legal representation on the taxpayer and the budget of a government.
The Kenyan system doesn’t have a clear definition of what substantial injustice is but under the penal code it’s a must for persons accused of murder to have the assistance of legal counsel. Failure to provide has occasioned to having the cases appealed and have them declared a nullity. It is important to note that murder trials may attract a life time imprisonment. Being given a life imprisonment is a hefty sentence. The penal code seemed to recognize that a life sentence is very sensitive and may amount to substantial injustice if counsel is not provided for a person accused of murder.
In David Njoroge mach aria v republic the court of appeal affirmed that under the new constitution accused persons would have legal counsel at states expense where substantial injustice would otherwise result. Though the court of appeal didn’t define what substantial injustice is, it gave instances where substantial injustice is a must
cases involving complex issues of law
where accused is unable to conduct his own defense owing to disability or language difficult
The court affirmed that under the new constitution any accused person regardless of the crime he charged with may have assistance of legal counsel appointed by court at state expense where court is satisfied that substantial injustice would otherwise result.
The court also found that since what substantial injustice was ruled that provisions of international conventions to which Kenya we signatory would be applicable.
The constitutional right of an accused to be defended by an advocate of his own choice is not absolute; it is exercised subjects to other public, thusit may be lost under certain circumstances. One circumstance that may arise is where an accused has been given ample time to engage an advocate but has failed. In Yusuf Gitta v.R the accused was refused an adjournment becausehehad ample time to do so but had failed to engage one.
Another circumstance is when an accused has been on bail and has had adjournments in his favour but his advocate fails to show up in the presumed hearing. In Yusuf Ahmed v. r, where the hearing proceeded in the absence of the advocate of the accused. refusal to grand an adjournment for a longer period does not amount to aninfringemnt of the right of the accused to be represented by his advocate.that adjournments are matters for the discretion of the trial courts.consderation is made to the fact that adjournments may lead to delayed justice hence needs for courts to strike a balance between two competing interests.
5.1 CONCLUSION
In conclusion based on my research the right to legal representation under the new constitution though more developed as compared to the previous constitution it still is not an absolute right. Based on the definition of what absolute right is which is a right that the state cannot waiver under any circumstance under our constitution  chapter 50(h) seems to give the courts powers to waiver it. Though legal representation is guaranteed to all persons accused in a court of law, for it to be availed it must be shown substantial injustice will occur if the representation is not provided. The constitution is silent on what substantial injustice is. However courts have gone further and defined situations in which substantial injustice may occur this as defined indavid njoroge macharia v republic involve cases involving complex issues of law and where accused is unable to conduct his own defense owing to disability or language difficulty
.the new constitution also provided that this legal represenatation shall be provided at state expense.this has budgetery implications on the government.laws havenot been developed yet providing guidelines on how this provision by the constitution can be attained.
as much the old constitution tried to provide for this right to legal representation it was limited with regard to whom it was provided for. For example, only murder cases which were tried in the high court the accused person was provided for with the advocate at the state expense. This was because they say that it was a capital offence punishable by death .the other cases like robbery with violence whose punishment was to by death and was also a capital offence tried in lower court was not given an advocate at state expense. However with the passing of a new constitution 2010 this right has been fully provided for as been discussed in the above chapter3. For example if we look at the various definition of the said right in the old constitution ,section 77(2)(d) it provided that every person who is charged with a criminal offence shall be permitted to defend himself before the court in person by a legal representative of his own choice. However if the said provision is read together with subsection (14) we will found out that the said right did not entitle the accused person to legal representation at the public expense. On the other hand, if we compare it with the new laws things seem to have improved. If we look at   the new constitution under article 50(2)(g) and (h) we will found out that  the accused person is granted both the  right to be represented by a lawyer of his own choice as well as a lawyer at state expense where substantial injustice would otherwise result. In addition to this, however in the context of article 50 the right to legal aid is in criminal cases but it is not clear as to whether this right extend to civil litigation, some efforts are being made in the context of the new constitution create an avenue for access to legal aid and legal services for those who are unable to afford them. One such attempt is through the legal Aid Bill, 2010 which is currently been discussed and drafted under the auspices of the National Legal Aid (an awareness’) Steering Committee. The Draft Bill provides not only for grant of legal aid in criminal matters, but also in civil and constitutional matters as well. Therefore, provided that litigants meet the requirements of the proposed law (such as the income threshold and substantial chance of success) legal aid will be available. Mediation and other out of court settlement will also be accessible through such assistance. Another exciting prospect about the context in this bill, is that legal aid will be available for matters of high public interest. This means that, if the bill is passed, public interest litigation may receive a much needed short in the arm: those waiting to challenge laws or actions on behalf of the public no longer need to fear having to meet the cost of legal proceedings on their own. Even asylum-seekers and refugees may apply for legal aid. The bill also requires that a decision on an application for legal aid be made without endure delay. This recognizes the fact that the longer a potential claimant, defendant or accused person has to wait for aid, the greater the risk that their chances of a fair trial or hearing are prejudiced. Furthermore the Legal Aid Commission envisaged under the bill will maintain a public list of legal services providers who can offer legal aid to applicants. This will assist those in need of legal aid in quickly tracking down a nearby service provider. The bill also makes provision for a Legal Aid Fund, which will ensure that the Legal Aid Commission will not depend solely on the government for the funds it needs to provide legal assistance to Kenyans. This will not only helps secure the independence of the commission from the state, but it will ensure that changes in government funding do not undermine operations of the legal aid program. In addition to this, the prosecution may decided not to bring any changes against an accused person but if the victim then commences a private prosecution, could this be a legitimate expense for purposes of legal aid?
Finally, the criminal procedure code contains recently amendment that provide for plea bargaining and victims statement. If a victim who does not understand the dynamics of plea bargaining seeks out legal advice when consulted about his or her views ,would this be a legitimate legal aid expense? The same victim may wish, if the accused is convicted, to have a victim statement delivered on his or her behalf, perhaps because the crime has left the victim too traumatized to personally prepare a statement. This statement assists a court in determining the sentence for an accused. This proposed bill if passed to law together with the new constitution we already have in place to me, it could be a new beginning for justice system in this country. 
CAPITAL J
Share this:
Tweet
More
Email
Print
Share on Tumblr
Pocket
Like this:
Like Loading...
Related
Categories Uncategorized Tags law 2 Comments
2 thoughts on “RIGHT TO LEGAL REPRESENTATION UNDER THE 2010 CONSTITUTION IS IT AN ABSOLUTE RIGHT”
attorney2017 says:
July 3, 2015 at 4:03 pm
Reblogged this on olivemumbo .
Reply
jgarrott says:
July 4, 2015 at 11:02 am
It is important for Christians to be involved in government, because only in Christ do we have a perspective that accurately values each individual.
Reply
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account. (  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
Post navigation
Previous Previous post: Is the Law Sin?
Next Next post: Reform police recruitment process
Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com. | The Cyanotype Theme .
Follow
Follow “IN BLACK AND WHITE,JAYSIKUKU BLOG”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 323 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.
%d bloggers like this: