Mar
APR
May
4
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
4 Apr 16 - 4 Apr 16
Close Help
Erstellen Erkunden Lernen & Support
Loslegen
Anmelden
Preise
Loslegen
Anmelden
Meine Prezis Erkunden Lernen & Support
Produkt Unternehmen Karriere Support Community Kontakt Apps
English Español 한국어 日本語 Deutsch Português Français Magyar Italiano
×
Houston, wir haben ein Problem!
Hoppla. Eine Firewall blockiert den Zugriff auf Prezi-Inhalte. Lesen Sie diesen Artikel , um mehr darüber zu erfahren, oder kontaktieren Sie Ihren System-Administrator.
Einprägsam aus der Masse hervorstechen - mit Prezi,
der Geheimwaffe für filmreifes Präsentieren.
Heute starten
Loslegen
Was ist Prezi? Mehr erfahren
Lädt Präsentation...
Öffentlich & kopierbar
Kopieren Teilen Einbetten Liked Like
Fernpräsentation
Senden Sie den Link unten via E-Mail oder PN
Kopieren
Präsentieren Sie für Ihr Publikum
Fernpräsentation beginnen
Eingeladene Zuschauer werden Ihnen folgen, während Sie navigieren und präsentieren
Zu dieser Präsentation eingeladene Personen benötigen kein Prezi-Konto
Dieser Link verfällt 10 Minuten, nachdem Sie die Präsentation schließen
Maximal 30 Nutzer können Ihrer Präsentation folgen
Erfahren Sie in unserer Wissensdatenbank mehr über diese Funktion
Möchten Sie diese Prezi wirklich löschen?
Weder Sie, noch die Personen, mit denen Sie diese Prezi geteilt haben, können die Prezi dann wiederherstellen.
Löschen Abbrechen
Möchten Sie Ihre "Likes" auf Facebook sichtbar machen?
Verbinden Sie Ihr Facebook-Konto mit Prezi und lassen Sie Ihre "Likes" in Ihrer Chronik erscheinen.
Sie können dies jederzeit unter Einstellungen & Konto ändern.
Nein danke
Mit Facebook verbinden
Copy of Dietrich v The Queen
Keine Beschreibung
von
Sally  O'Donoghue
am 1. April 2013
Twittern
Kommentare (0)
Bitte anmelden , um Ihren Kommentar hinzuzufügen.
Missbrauch melden
Transkript von Copy of Dietrich v The Queen
Dietrich v The Queen is important Background Information On the 17th of December 1986, Olaf Dietrich was found with around 70 grams of heroin when he tried to fly from Bangkok, Thailand to Australia Melbourne.  The case all began when Dietrich was taken into custody after police searched his flat and found condoms with heroin in it as well as some more in a plastic bag under a rug. Olaf Dietrich was born in 1952. Olaf, his brother and parents moved to Melbourne in 1962. Olaf was known as a smart child when he was young but dropped out of school as soon as he could, which was when he was 14. At the age of 18 Dietrich had already started getting into trouble with the law for giving false information about him and using false registration plates. For the next decade he started to commit a lot of theft offences. Dietrich became a guns insurance salesman but owed $360,000 after his business turned bad.  He ended up spending a few years in jail because of all the offences he had committed. After coming out of jail he started importing drugs and committing armed robberies. Olaf Dietrich In 1988 Dietrich was tried for drug trafficking offences in the county court of Victoria. During the trial Dietrich had no legal representation even though he applied for the legal aid commission of Victoria for help.  The Legal aid commission of Victoria said they would only help him if he pleaded guilty but Dietrich refused to plead guilty. He was found convicted of the principal charges in the county court. Dietrich decided to appeal to the Supreme Court because he felt that it was unfair but to the County Court refused to hear his appeal so Dietrich appealed to the high court. . Olaf dietrich in 2005 the courtcase The appeal went to the high court. He appealed based on the fact that he was not able to get legal representation for his trial in 1988. Olaf Dietrich was represented by David Grace on a pro bono basis(which is where you only pay for the legal fees if you win the case. The main argument that Dietrich had was it was a miscarriage of justice since he didn’t have a fair trial because he didn’t have any legal representation. His argument was based on the common law that allows an accused person to have a fair trial and the right to a fair trial. Right to fair trial Dietrich's argument was Australia's obligation under the international law.  Especially the United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights(ICCPR), which Australia has an agreeement with which says an accussed should have legal assistance in any case where the interest of justice is needed and the European Convention of Human Rights,(Australias isn't in a party with) which also guarantees that defendants have legal aid. Dietrich's argument about the ICCPR was that Australia's common law should be updated according to the ICCPR. Dietrich also used similar cases in other common law countries like the United States and Cananda  as an examples. In the United States, the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution guaranteed the right to council. (1)The amendment says that "In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right... to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence." Picture of the high court in Australia bibliography Footnotes http://www.cvsa.com.au/?page_id=471/leagal-discussion/dietrich-v-the-queen-aka-hugo-rich/ Miscarriage of justice Dietrich's other argument was how he asked  the judge for an adjournment but was rejected because the trial judge said it has been more then a year since the crime took place. He said the judge should have granted him an adjournment until he was able to find himself legal representation. Dietrich said it was a miscarriage of justice. At the high court it was said that the trial judge was not aware that he had the right to adjourn the trial. Not being able to get legal representation also lead to more problems since when he was on trial for the drug offence the jury found him guilty of importing drugs in the condom but found him not guilty for oweing the heroin in the plastic bag. This meant that Dietrich may have been able to be acquitted of the other charges if he was able to get legal representation. Judges opinions
Justice Deane and Justice Gaudron suggested that the right to representation in circumstances be founded in the constitution.
Justice Brennan and Justice Dawson disagreed with it though. Justice Brennan argued that it wouldn’t be right for judges to be able to use their power to adjourn trials.
The result of the case was that the court ordered the application to appeal be granted and the convictions quashed and a new trial will be held. They didnt end up having a re-trial since Dietrich had already served his sentence. Impact of the case The case started a debate about whether legal aid should be provided when an accussed is facing court but the government of Victoria suggested that this could cause a lot of delays in trials especially if the accussed can't get any legal representation. A nationwide precedent was established that an accused must have a lawyer in major trials. It caused changes to be made in the legal system. by Peter Lee Human rights Human rights are the basic rights that every human has that should not be taken away. Some human rights can be taken away in some circumstances. Every country has different human right systems. some countries allow some things that other countries do not allow. An example would be torture, some countries allow torture but other countries don't allow it. Human rights are based on culture, religion, history and the type of government system. what is UDHR UDHR stands for Universal of human rights. It is an agreement that countries sign to try and follow these set of Human rights. You can not be found guilty of breaking it. It is not an actual law but more of a promise that is made. Some countries have gone further with the human rights by making laws to make sure those human rights are followed. There are 30 different types of human rights, some are followed but some are not. Human Rights denied In the Dietrich v The Queen case some human rights were denied. They include  The right to fair trial, everyone has the right to ask for legal help when their rights are not respected and no one has the right to take away any of the rights in the Universal Declaration of human rights. The right to fair trial This Human right means that everyone has the right to have a fair and public trial for any criminal charged made against them. The right to fair trial use to be more important in criminal law but now it is just as important in other judicial proceedings like civil law, administrative proceedings and special proceedings. A lot of countries have made new laws about how everyone should have a fair trials to make sure the right to fair trial right is used. The main human right that was denied in the Dietrich vs The Queen case was Dietrich's right to a fair trial.  By Dietrich not being able to get any legal representation for his trial meant that the human right was denied. This was also one of the main  arguments that Dietrich used when he was appealing in the high court. Everyone has the right to ask for help This human right means that everyone can ask for legal help if they feel that their own human rights are not being respected. An example of this human right being denied could be Deitrich's case. Dietrich got denied this law as he went to ask for legal aid after not being able to afford any legal representation but was told that he had to plead guilty to be able to get any legal aid.  This showed that Dietrich was not able to get the help that he needed to help him out in the trial. no one can take away your human right This human right means that everyone has their human rights and that those rights should not be taken away from them unless they have done something to lose the human right. An example of losing your human right would be if you are in prison, you will lose your right to travel as you wish because your in prison. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dietrich_v_The_Queen
http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/cth/high_ct/177clr292.html
http://www.theage.com.au/ national/rich-man-poor-man-20091112-ick8.html
http://www.aph.gov.au/senate/committee/legcon_ctte/completed_inquiries/1996-99/legalaid/report/c07.htm
http://epublications.bond.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1068&context=blr
http://www.enotes.com/topic/Dietrich_v_The_Queen
http://www.cvsa.com.au/?page_id=471/leagal-discussion/dietrich-v-the-queen-aka-hugo-rich/ dietrich after release After Dietrich got out of prison and the case was finished Dietrich still kept getting into trouble with the law. In 2005, Dietrich robbed a bank in BlackBurn North. During the bank robbery Dietrich got the money from the security guard but still shot at the security guard (Erwin Kastenberger, 58 years old) and ended up killing him as it pearced through his lung, heart and liver. On Novemeber 13th 2009, Dietrich was sentenced to life imprisonment after he was found guilty of the murder of security guard Erwin  Kastenberger. This sentence means that Dietrich will spend the rest of his life in prison and never be able to get out. Picture of the robbery in 2005. Security guard on top and Dietrich under. The judges that had different opinions in the Dietrich v The Queen trial were justice Deane and justice guadron's opinions and Justice Brennan and Justice Dawson's opinion. In the end it was decided there is no right in common law to have legal representation but it is appropriate in some cases.
Justice Deane and Justice Gaudron suggested that the right to representation in circumstances be founded in the constitution.
Justice Brennan and Justice Dawson disagreed with it though. Justice Brennan argued that it wouldn’t be right for judges to be able to use their power to adjourn trials.
The result of the case was that the court ordered the application to appeal be granted and the convictions quashed and a new trial will be held. They didnt end up having a re-trial since Dietrich had already served his sentence.
Komplettes Transkript
Weitere Präsentationen von Sally  O'Donoghue
Copy of The Western Lowland Gorillas
slipping out of existence (school project, url at bottom not real)
Same Sex Marriage
Same Sex Marriage
Weitere Prezis von diesem Autor
Beliebte Präsentationen
Weitere beliebte oder die neuesten Prezis ansehen
Produkt Unternehmen Karriere Support Community Kontakt Apps
English
español
한국어
日本語
Deutsch
Português
français
Magyar
italiano
© 2016 Prezi Inc.  Nutzungsbedingungen
<p>Verbinden Sie Ihr Facebook-Konto mit Prezi und veröffentlichen Sie in der Zukunft Ihre "Likes".</p><form class="bypass" method="post" action="/web/20160404134451/https://prezi.com/associate/facebook/"><input type='hidden' name='csrfmiddlewaretoken' value='mJ5ezm3xgB2cKSr2PR24scZhFPueV657' /><input type="hidden" name="next" value="/-ivq-wk3bm9s/og-like/"><p class="clearfix"><button type="submit" class="btn btn-primary" id="fb-connect-like-ok-btn">OK</button><a class="btn pull-right" onclick="closeOverlay();return false;" href="javascript:void(0);">Nein danke</a></p></form>