Prison, London, United Kingdom
Feedback
Marshalsea, a prison formerly existing in Southwark , London, on the south bank of the Thames and attached to the court of that name held by the steward and marshal of the English (later British) king.
It existed as early as the reign of Edward III.
It was consolidated in 1842 with the Queen’s Bench and Fleet prisons and was then described as a “prison for debtors and for persons charged with contempt of Her Majesty’s courts of the Marshalsea, the court of the queen’s palace of Westminster, and the high court of admiralty, also for admiralty prisoners under sentence of courts martial.”
The Marshalsea prison was abolished in 1849.
The prison is described in Charles Dickens’ novel Little Dorrit.
Share
Corrections?
Updates?
Help us improve this article!
Contact our editors with your Feedback .
To propose your own edits, go to Edit Mode .
You may also be interested in...
"Marshalsea".
Encyclopædia Britannica.
Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2016.
Web.
16 May.
2016
<http://www.britannica.com/topic/Marshalsea>.
Marshalsea.
(2016).
In Encyclopædia Britannica.
Retrieved from http://www.britannica.com/topic/Marshalsea
Harvard style:
Marshalsea.
2016.
Encyclopædia Britannica Online.
Retrieved 16 May, 2016, from http://www.britannica.com/topic/Marshalsea
Chicago Manual of Style:
Encyclopædia Britannica Online, s. v. "Marshalsea", accessed May 16, 2016, http://www.britannica.com/topic/Marshalsea.
While every effort has been made to follow citation style rules, there may be some discrepancies.
Please refer to the appropriate style manual or other sources if you have any questions.
Click anywhere inside the article to add text or insert superscripts, subscripts, and special characters.
You can also highlight a section and use the tools in this bar to modify existing content:
Add links to related Britannica articles!
You can double-click any word or highlight a word or phrase in the text below and then select an article from the search box.
Or, simply highlight a word or phrase in the article, then enter the article name or term you'd like to link to in the search box below, and select from the list of results.
Note: we do not allow links to external resources in editor.
Please click the Web sites link for this article to add citations for
external Web sites.
Submit
We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles.
You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind:
Encyclopaedia Britannica articles are written in a neutral, objective tone for a general audience.
You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered.
Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources.
At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context.
(Internet URLs are best.)
Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval.
Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions.
MEDIA FOR: