Pain and Degradation in Georgian London: Life in the Marshalsea Prison
Jerry White
Jerry White is a former editor of History Workshop Journal, and Visiting Professor of London History at Birkbeck. His latest book, London in the Nineteenth Century: a Human Awful Wonder of God, was published by Jonathan Cape in 2007. He is currently working on a history of London in the eighteenth century.
jerry.white86{at}btinternet.com
Abstract
The Marshalsea Prison in Southwark was London’s most important prison for poor debtors in the eighteenth century. In 1729                      it came under parliamentary scrutiny by James Oglethorpe’s Gaols Committee which revealed a scandalous abuse of power involving                      the deliberate starvation of prisoners, torture, even murder. The prison’s deputy keeper, William Acton, stood trial on four                      charges of murder but was acquitted on each; there seems to have been political manipulation at the highest level to ensure                      that no charge was proven against Acton or any of the other gaolers prosecuted as a result of the Gaols Committee’s endeavours.                      We are afforded an intimate glimpse of life in Acton’s Marshalsea through the diary of John Baptist Grano, a musician imprisoned                      there for debt at the time of Oglethorpe’s inquiry. Grano shows us the reality of two prisons subsisting in one establishment:                      the ‘master’s side’ for those who could pay Acton for their keep and the dreadful ‘common side’ where prisoners were deprived                      of all charitable assistance until they were helped by their friends or until they starved to death. In an era of increasing                      gentility and politeness, the Marshalsea reminds us of the structures of injustice, oppression and rapacious profiteering                      that underpinned daily life in the eighteenth-century metropolis.
© The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of History Workshop Journal, all rights reserved.
(2009) 68 (1): 69-98. doi: 10.1093/hwj/dbp011
» AbstractFree