'Those Were the Days'*: Whose Marshalsea? [or Prisons of Our Own Making]
 "Denmark's a prison..."       [Hamlet]
1. For starters, an invocation to the spirit of Hamlet as he hovered over the Marshalsea world of Charles Dickens [in Little Dorritt].  That Marshalsea--there were in fact two--
made famous by the English writer, was located on the south side of the river Thames in London, and served as a prison as early as the 14th century until it closed in 1849. Many
criminals found 'refuge' there: those waiting Court Martial for military crimes; those who had committed 'unnatural' crimes; those intellectuals who had committed sedition against
the State; and, the many debtors to be found in London.
For paying prisoners, the Marshalsea provided access to a shop, a restaurant and a bar and also 'granted' the privilege of being allowed outside its walls every day; for those
less fortunate, they were likely to be crammed into one of nine small barely furnished 'cells' along with dozens of others. William Hepworth Dixon wrote [in 1885] that one could
find poets, pirates, parsons, plotters, coiners, libellers, defaulters, Jesuits and vagabonds from every class in society.** Even the renowned playwright, Ben Johnson, spent some
time there.
Historically, there were two Marshalseas--the first version lasted for some 500 years until it fell into disrepair[1811], and it was replaced by a second version [which only
lasted for some 38 years]. It was the latter that housed the father of Charles Dickens--for a small debt that he owed a baker. The second Marshalsea was finally demolished in the
1870's and all that remains is a plaque on a wall.
That was then.
This is now.
Now, people carry their Marshalsea around with them. We have, in the spirit of the age of unenlightenment, created prisons of our own making. 
Particularly in our minds.
Especially in our minds.
Mostly invisible--though some resemble manacles [of different race, political persuasion and moral fixity] on the backs of weary citizens, they rattle and clank like the ghosts of a Xmas long past.  In the race to have opinions on everything under the sun, some people have bartered the truths of openmindess [freedom] for the trifles of self-confinement [My Marshalsea].
2. Whose Marshalseas?
[a] Over in Stalag 12, there are people, who, for some gombeen reason, wish to abolish bullying in public schools. Apparently, they reside in Michigan, too.  They refuse to adhere to an idyllic, Rockwellian set of postcards about their America--where almost everyone is white, aspiring middle class, and all the children are Lake-Woebegone-above-average. They read authors like Frances Fitzgerald, Howard Zinn, and periodicals such as the New Republic and Mother Jones,  to namedrop a few.They most probably voted for that socialised medicine panacea aka Obamacare;they preach about 'level playing fields'; they disdain the fact that large corporations in the USA don't pay any taxes; and they are all about universal bake sales. Apart from the Stalag, they don't occupy anything.
If the truth be told, they can't help themselves. Some are even card-carrying members of elite private schools. They tend to see, feel, smell and touch social injustice everywhere. They avoid the syndrome of 'blaming the victim' at all costs-- some of them even care about prison reform [but we won't go there, at least not in this Blog].
[b] Meanwhile, over in Stalag 13, you can invariably find social conservatives nursing their wrath to keep it warm***They scream, in sound bytes and television talk shows-- freedom!...except for the poor, the homeless, the unemployed, the chronically sick, the welfare mothers.....and, of course, the homosexuals. 
Another big scream is the preservation of individual rights: the right to be rich [American Dream, 101]; the right to carry guns; the right to keep  rottweilers; and the right to have tea parties at the drop of  a political primary.  Rules are the scourge of mankind--there must always be room for exceptions. Government should just go away. Somewhere else. Greece, perhaps. 
Every conceivable social evil can be cured by the magic of the marketplace, by waving the wand of free-market solutions over grimy and lumpy causes. 
That and a liberal[!] dose of de-regulation will surely make America healthy, wealthy and wise again. Or so it goes. And not only in New Hampshire....but in Michigan too.
So, anti-bullying legislation--or any social-minded crusade-- is alright for that group, but never for this group. 
No exceptions.
THEY conjecture.
They refute.
They conjecture.
THEY refute.
3. Joy Johnson, in another context**** once mentioned that 'we live in a fault society...and when something goes terribly wrong, we need to find someone to blame..' 
I blame Hamlet.  
Hamlet must have started it all...with his comment[above] that Denmark is a prison, way back when. [Of course the culprit was really that Mr. Shakespeare...that is, if he really was the writer of those thirty plus plays]. 
No matter.For Marshalsea has become a state of mind, a sanctuary where one can hide from the truths that we don't want to face; or, conversely, a prison thought-maze of our own making; or, worse still, a bully pulpit where we manufacture the intellectual, social and moral weapons to attack other un-like-minded people.
Safe from inside our prison walls.
There, in the comfort of our own un-enlightenment, truth can never touch us, and opinions can never be father to the thought. 
Or the fact for that matter.
In prisons of our own making.....
4. Footnote:  PRISON, n. A place of punishments and rewards. The poet assures us that —"Stone walls do not a prison make,"but a combination of the stone wall, the political parasite and the moral instructor is no garden of sweets. [from the Devil's Dictionary by Ambrose Bierce]
*borrowed from the song of the same name
** in Her Majesty's Towers [1885]
*** a line from Tam O'Shanter, by Robert Burns
**** in The Use of Groups in Schools