Apr
MAY
Jun
16
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
16 May 16 - 16 May 16
Close Help
Skip Navigation
Oxford Journals
Contact Us
My Basket
My                                                   Account
History Workshop Journal
About This Journal
Contact This Journal
Subscriptions
View Current Issue (Volume 81 Issue 1 Spring 2016)
Archive
Search
Oxford Journals
Arts & Humanities
History Workshop Journal
Volume 68 Issue 1
Pp. 69-98.
Pain and Degradation in Georgian London: Life in the Marshalsea Prison
Jerry White
Jerry White is a former editor of History Workshop Journal, and Visiting Professor of London History at Birkbeck.
His latest book, London in the Nineteenth Century: a Human Awful Wonder of God, was published by Jonathan Cape in 2007.
He is currently working on a history of London in the eighteenth century.
jerry.white86{at}btinternet.com
Abstract
The Marshalsea Prison in Southwark was London’s most important prison for poor debtors in the eighteenth century.
In 1729                      it came under parliamentary scrutiny by James Oglethorpe’s Gaols Committee which revealed a scandalous abuse of power involving                      the deliberate starvation of prisoners, torture, even murder.
The prison’s deputy keeper, William Acton, stood trial on four                      charges of murder but was acquitted on each; there seems to have been political manipulation at the highest level to ensure                      that no charge was proven against Acton or any of the other gaolers prosecuted as a result of the Gaols Committee’s endeavours.
We are afforded an intimate glimpse of life in Acton’s Marshalsea through the diary of John Baptist Grano, a musician imprisoned                      there for debt at the time of Oglethorpe’s inquiry.
Grano shows us the reality of two prisons subsisting in one establishment:                      the ‘master’s side’ for those who could pay Acton for their keep and the dreadful ‘common side’ where prisoners were deprived                      of all charitable assistance until they were helped by their friends or until they starved to death.
In an era of increasing                      gentility and politeness, the Marshalsea reminds us of the structures of injustice, oppression and rapacious profiteering                      that underpinned daily life in the eighteenth-century metropolis.
© The Author 2009.
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of History Workshop Journal, all rights reserved.
« Previous | Next Article » Table of Contents
This Article
Hist Workshop J
(2009) 68 (1): 69-98.
doi: 10.1093/hwj/dbp011
» AbstractFree
Full Text (HTML)
Full Text (PDF)
Raphael Samuel Lecture
Classifications
ARTICLES AND ESSAYS
Services
Article metrics
Alert me when cited
Alert me if corrected
Find similar articles
Similar articles in Web of Science
Add to my archive
Download citation
Request Permissions
Citing Articles
Load citing article information
Citing articles via CrossRef
Citing articles via Scopus
Citing articles via Web of Science
Citing articles via Google Scholar
Google Scholar
Articles by  White, J.
Search for related content
Related Content
Load related web page information
Share
Email this article
CiteULike
Delicious
Facebook
Google+
Mendeley
Twitter
What's this?
Search this journal:
Advanced »
Current Issue
Spring 2016 81 (1)
Alert me to new issues
The Journal
About this journal
Publishers' Books for Review
Rights & Permissions
Dispatch date of the next issue
We are mobile – find out more
This journal is a member of the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE)
Journals Career Network
Impact factor: 0.659
5-Yr impact factor: 0.491
Administrative Editor
Tessa Chynoweth
View full editorial board
For Authors
Instructions to authors
Self-Archiving Policy
Open Access options for authors - visit Oxford Open
Corporate Services
Advertising sales
Reprints
Supplements
Alerting Services
Email table of contents
Email Advance Access alerts
CiteTrack
XML RSS feed
Widgets
Get a widget
Most
Most Read
Solidarity and Sexuality: Lesbians and Gays Support the Miners 1984-5
Visions in a Ninth-Century Village: an Early Medieval Microhistory
Set in Stone?
Statues and Slavery in London
The Quennells and the 'History of Everyday Life in England, c. 1918-69
Crediting Women in the Early Modern English Economy
» View all Most Read articles
Most Cited
Places and Their Pasts
Imperialism and Motherhood
Asylums, Families and the State
WORKSHOP OF THE WORLD: Steam Power and Hand Technoloy in Mid-Victorian Britain
Male Vice and Feminist Virtue: Feminism and the Politics of Prostitution in Nineteenth-Century Britain
» View all Most Cited articles
Disclaimer: Please note that abstracts for content published before 1996 were                    created through digital scanning and may therefore not exactly                    replicate the text of the original print issues.
All efforts have                    been made to ensure accuracy, but the Publisher will not be held                    responsible for any remaining inaccuracies.
If you require any                    further clarification, please contact our Customer Services Department.
Online ISSN 1477-4569 - Print ISSN 1363-3554
Copyright ©   2016 Oxford University Press
Oxford Journals Oxford University Press
Site Map
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Legal Notices
Frequently Asked Questions
Other Oxford University Press sites: