Apr
MAY
Jun
16
2015
2016
2017
1 captures
16 May 16 - 16 May 16
Close Help
London By Gaslight
eclectic musings on Victorian Britain
Search
Main menu
Skip to primary content
Home
My London
Victorian Christmastide
Post navigation
← Previous Next →
The Marshalsea Debtors Prison
Posted on
April 14, 2012
by Mark
This slideshow requires JavaScript.
I had a day in London with some friends yesterday and as is my want decided to go and check out the remains of The Marshalsea debtors prison.
The Marshalsea stood on the south bank of Thames in Southwark for a good three hundred years or so.
It was built to house men who had been court marshalled for crimes at sea.
Also men who were accused of unnatural crimes which would’ve been homosexuals and those who had sex with animals .
There would politicals  and intellectuals accused of sedition and London’s debtors.
These would be a Tory dream if they were around today.
The Marshalsea was run for profit, if you had the money there was a bar, a shop and even a restaurant and of course you were allowed out during the day to earn the money to pay your debts, to get a good idea of how this works watch BBC’s Little Dorritt.
Unfortunately a small debt could land you in the prison for decades as it was the creditors who decided your fate.
But it was John Dickens, Charles Dickens father who was sent there in 1824 for a debt to a baker which forced to leave school at the age of 12 for a hideous blacking job in a factory and here are the remains of the prison.
Share this:
Click to share on Pinterest (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Tumblr (Opens in new window)
More
Click to share on Google+ (Opens in new window)
Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Click to print (Opens in new window)
Click to email (Opens in new window)
Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Click to share on Twitter (Opens in new window)
Like this:
Like Loading...
Related
This entry was posted in Charles Dickens , Prisons and tagged Blacking Factory , Charles Dickens , John Dickens , Marshalsea debtors prison , The Marshalsea by Mark .
Bookmark the permalink .
Leave a Reply
Cancel reply
Enter your comment here...
Fill in your details below or click an icon to log in:
Email (required) (Address never made public)
Name (required)
Website
You are commenting using your WordPress.com account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Twitter account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Facebook account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
You are commenting using your Google+ account.
(  Log Out  /  Change  )
Cancel
Connecting to %s
Notify me of new comments via email.
The Twenty Eleven Theme .
| Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com.
Follow
Follow “London By Gaslight”
Get every new post delivered to your Inbox.
Join 187 other followers
Build a website with WordPress.com
Send to Email Address
Your Name
Your Email Address
Cancel
Post was not sent - check your email addresses!
Email check failed, please try again
Sorry, your blog cannot share posts by email.
%d bloggers like this: